The Project Gutenberg EBook of A College Girl, by Mrs. George de Horne Vaizey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A College Girl

Author: Mrs. George de Horne Vaizey

Illustrator: W.H.C. Groome

Release Date: April 16, 2007 [EBook #21110]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COLLEGE GIRL ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





A College Girl

By Mrs George de Horne Vaizey
________________________________________________________________________
Here is a book about the young girl and her awakening to the world by
this talented author.  Darsie, the heroine, is selected by an old aunt
to come and spend a year or so as her companion.  The old woman tries
to coach Darsie in matters of deportment and behaviour.  This would be
pretty odious if it were not for the presence locally of a young family
of boys and girls of Darsie's age, whom, being rich and living rather
grandly, the aunt allows Darsie to know.  The first half of the book
describes the times they had.  The old aunt promises Darsie that she
will make available the funds needed for Darsie to go up to Cambridge
as a student at Newnham, a girls' college.

When the second half of the book begins the old aunt has just died, and
Darsie feels glad that the poor old lady will be relieved of all her
pains.  The years of studentship are well described, and the friends
that  Darsie made come and go through the story.  Finally we reach the
last exams.  Darsie does quite well, but is not in the First Class.  She
has a Second, which will be enough for her to be able to go and teach at
some less distinguished school.  But her friend Dan, one of those whom
we met in the first half of the book, has obtained a First Class Honours
degree, and the book ends with him asking her to marry him.  What he
doesn't know, and I suppose the author didn't either, is that young men
going to teach at a top-rate boys' school are expected to spend their
spare time coaching sports, and not to be married.  In fact they would
be better to have achieved a "Blue" at Oxford or Cambridge than a good
degree.

I have had to make a slightly strange and annoying change to the name of
one of the girls in the story.  I changed Vi Vernon to Vie Vernon.  The
reason was that otherwise the speech generator always read her name as
"Six Vernon".  What we have now sounds correct, but if you read the book
you will see this mis-spelling two dozen times.  My apologies for doing
this, but you will understand why I did it.

It is a good read, and as always I recommend making an audiobook of it,
so that you can listen to it. NH
________________________________________________________________________

A COLLEGE GIRL

BY MRS GEORGE DE HORNE VAIZEY



CHAPTER ONE.

BOYS AND GIRLS.

This is the tale of two terraces, of two families who lived therein, of
several boys and many girls, and especially of one Darsie, her
education, adventures, and ultimate romance.

Darsie was the second daughter in a family of six, and by reason of her
upsetting nature had won for herself that privilege of priority which by
all approved traditions should have belonged to Clemence, the elder
sister.  Clemence was serene and blonde; in virtue of her seventeen
years her pigtail was now worn doubled up, and her skirts had reached
the discreet level of her ankles.  She had a soft pink and white face,
and a pretty red mouth, the lips of which permanently fell apart,
disclosing two small white teeth in the centre of the upper gum, because
of which peculiarity her affectionate family had bestowed upon her the
nickname of "Bunnie."  Perhaps the cognomen had something to do with her
subordinate position.  It was impossible to imagine any one with the
name of "Bunnie" queening it over that will-o'-the-wisp, that electric
flash, that tantalising, audacious creature who is the heroine of these
pages.

Darsie at fifteen!  How shall one describe her to the unfortunates who
have never beheld her in the flesh?  It is for most girls an awkward
age, an age of angles, of ungainly bulk, of awkward ways, self-conscious
speech, crass ignorance, and sublime conceit.  Clemence had passed
through this stage with much suffering of spirits on her own part and
that of her relations; Lavender, the third daughter, showed at thirteen
preliminary symptoms of appalling violence; but Darsie remained as ever
that fascinating combination of a child and a woman of the world, which
had been her characteristic from earliest youth.  Always graceful and
alert, she sailed triumphant through the trying years, with straight
back, graceful gait, and eyes a-shine with a happy self-confidence.  "I
am here!" announced Darsie's eyes to an admiring world.  "Let the band
strike up!"

Some inherent quality in Darsie--some grace, some charm, some spell--
which she wove over the eyes of beholders, caused them to credit her
with a beauty which she did not possess.  Even her family shared in this
delusion, and set her up as the superlative in degree, so that "as
pretty as Darsie" had come to be regarded a climax of praise.  The glint
of her chestnut hair, the wide, bright eyes, the little oval face set on
a long, slim throat smote the onlooker with instant delight, and so
blinded him that he had no sight left with which to behold the blemishes
which walked hand in hand.  Photographs valiantly strove to demonstrate
the truth; pointed out with cruel truth the stretching mouth, the small,
inadequate nose, but even the testimony of sunlight could not convince
the blind.  They sniffed, and said: "What a travesty!  Never again to
_that_ photographer!  Next time we'll try the man in C-- Street," and
Darsie's beauty lived on, an uncontroverted legend.

By a triumph of bad management, which the Garnett girls never ceased to
deplore, their three brothers came at the end instead of the beginning
of the family.  Three grown-up brothers would have been a grand asset;
big boys who would have shown a manly tenderness towards the weaknesses
of little sisters; who would have helped and amused; big boys going to
school, young men going to college, coming home in the vacations,
bringing their friends, acting as squires and escorts to the girls at
home.  Later on brothers at business, wealthy brothers, generous
brothers; brothers who understood how _long_ quarter-day was in coming
round, and how astonishingly quickly a girl's allowance vanishes into
space!  Clemence, Darsie, and Lavender had read of such brothers in
books, and would have gladly welcomed their good offices in the flesh,
but three noisy, quarrelsome, more or less grimy schoolboys, superbly
indifferent to "those girls"--this was another, and a very different
tale!  Harry was twelve--a fair, blunt-featured lad with a yawning
cavity in the front of his mouth, the result of one of the many
accidents which had punctuated his life.  On the top story of the
Garnett house there ran a narrow passage, halfway along which, for want
of a better site, a swing depended from two great iron hooks.  Harry, as
champion swinger, ever striving after fresh flights, had one day in a
frenzy of enthusiasm swung the rings free from their hold, and
descended, swing and all, in a crash on the oil-clothed floor.  The
crash, the shrieks of the victim and his attendant sprites, smote upon
Mrs Garnett's ears as she sat wrestling with the "stocking basket" in a
room below, and as she credibly avowed, took years from her life.
Almost the first objects which met her eye, when, in one bound, as it
seemed, she reached the scene of the disaster, was a selection of small
white teeth scattered over the oil-clothed floor.  Henceforth for years
Harry pursued his way minus front teeth, and the nursery legend darkly
hinted that so injured had been the gums by his fall that no second
supply could be expected.  Harry avowed a sincere aspiration that this
should be the case.  "I can eat as much without them," he declared, "and
when I grow up I'll have them false, and be an explorer, and scare
savages like the man in Rider Haggard," so that teeth, or no teeth,
would appear to hold the secret of his destiny.

Russell had adenoids, and snored.  His peculiarities included a faculty
for breaking his bones, at frequent and inconvenient occasions, an
insatiable curiosity about matters with which he had no concern, and a
most engaging and delusive silkiness of manner.  "Gentleman Russell," a
title bestowed by his elders, had an irritating effect on an elder
brother conscious of being condemned by the contrast, and when quoted
downstairs brought an unfailing echo of thumps in the seclusion of the
playroom.

Tim played on his privileges as "littlest," and his mother's barely
concealed partiality, and was as irritating to his elders as a small
person can be, who is always present when he is not wanted, absent when
he is, in peace adopts the airs of a conqueror, and in warfare promptly
cries, and collapses into a curly-headed baby boy, whom the authorities
declare it is "cr-uel" to bully!

For the rest, the house was of the high and narrow order common to town
terraces, inconveniently crowded by its many inmates, and viewed from
without, of a dark and grimy appearance.

Sandon Terrace had no boast to make either from an architectural or a
luxurious point of view, and was so obviously inferior to its neighbour,
Napier Terrace, that it was lacerating to the Garnett pride to feel that
their sworn friends the Vernons were so much better domiciled than
themselves.  Napier Terrace had a strip of garden between itself and the
rough outer world; big gateways stood at either end, and what Vie Vernon
grandiloquently spoke of as "a carriage sweep" curved broadly between.
Divided accurately among the houses in the terrace, the space of ground
apportioned to each was limited to a few square yards, but the Vernons
were chronically superior on the subject of "the grounds," and in
springtime when three hawthorns, a lilac, and one spindly laburnum-tree
struggled into bloom, their airs were beyond endurance.

The Vernons had also a second claim to superiority over the Garnetts,
inasmuch as they were the proud possessors of an elder brother, a remote
and learned person who gained scholarships, and was going to be Prime
Minister when he was grown up.  Dan at eighteen, coaching with a tutor
preparatory to going up to Cambridge, was removed by continents of
superiority from day-school juniors.  Occasionally in their disguise of
the deadly jealousy which in truth consumed them, the Garnett family
endeavoured to make light of the personality of this envied person.  To
begin with, his name!  "Dan" was well enough.  "Dan" sounded a boy-like
boy, a manly man; of a "Dan" much might be expected in the way of sport
and mischief, but--oh, my goodness--_Daniel_!  The Garnetts discussed
the cognomen over the play-room fire.

"It must be so _embarrassing_ to have a Bible name!"  Lavender opined.
"Think of church!  When they read about me I should be covered with
confusion, and imagine that every one was staring at our pew!"

Clemence stared thoughtfully into space.  "I, Clemence, take thee
Daniel," she recited slowly, and shuddered.  "No--really, I couldn't!"

"He wouldn't have you!" the three boys piped; even Tim, who plainly was
talking of matters he could not understand, added his note to the
chorus, but Darsie cocked her little head, and added eagerly--

"Couldn't you, really?  What _could_ you, do you think?"

Clemence stared again, more rapt than ever.

"Lancelot, perhaps," she opined, "or Sigismund.  Everard's nice too, or
Ronald or Guy--"

"Bah!  Sugary.  _I_ couldn't!  Daniel is _ugly_," Darsie admitted, "but
it's strong.  Dan Vernon will fight lions like the Bible one; they'll
roar about him, and his enemies will cast him in, but they'll not manage
to kill him.  He'll trample them under foot, and leave them behind, like
milestones on the road."  Darsie was nothing if not inaccurate, but in
the bosom of one's own family romantic flights are not allowed to atone
for discrepancies, and the elder sister was quick to correct.

"Daniel didn't fight the lions!  What's the use of being high falutin'
and making similes that aren't correct?"

"Dear Clemence, you _are_ so literal!"  Darsie tilted her head with an
air of superiority which reduced the elder to silence, the while she
cogitated painfully why such a charge should be cast as a reproach.  To
be literal was to be correct.  Daniel had _not_ fought the lions!
Darsie had muddled up the fact in her usual scatterbrain fashion, and by
good right should have deplored her error.  Darsie, however, was seldom
known to do anything so dull; she preferred by a nimble change of front
to put others in the wrong, and keep the honours to herself.  Now, after
a momentary pause, she skimmed lightly on to another phase of the
subject.  "What should you say was the character and life history of a
woman who could call her eldest child `Daniel,' the second `Viola
Imogen,' and the third and fourth `Hannah' and `John'?"

Clemence had no inspiration on the subject.  She said: "Don't be silly!"
sharply, and left it to Lavender to supply the necessary stimulus.

"_Tell_ us, Darsie, tell us!  You make it up--"

"My dear, it is evident to the meanest intellect.  She was the child of
a simple country household, who, on her marriage, went to live in a
town; and when her first-born son was born, she pined to have him
christened by her father's name in the grey old church beneath the ivy
tower; so they travelled there, and the white-haired sire held the
infant at the font, while the tears furrowed his aged cheeks.  _But_--by
slow degrees the insidious effects of the great capital invaded the mind
of the sweet young wife, and the simple tastes of her girlhood turned to
vanity, so that when the second babe was born, and her husband wished to
call her Hannah after her sainted grandmother, she wept, and made an
awful fuss, and would not be consoled until he gave in to Viola Imogen,
and a christening cloak trimmed with plush.  And she was christened in a
city church, and the organ pealed, and the godmothers wore rich array,
and the poor old father stayed at home and had a slice of christening
cake sent by the post.  But the years passed on.  Saddened and sobered
by the discipline of life, aged and worn, her thoughts turned once more
to her quiet youth, and when at last a third child--"

"There's only two years between them!"

Darsie frowned, but continued her narrative in a heightened voice--

"--Was laid in her arms, and her husband suggested `Ermyntrude'; she
shuddered, and murmured softly, `Hannah--_plain_ Hannah!' and plain
Hannah she has been ever since!"

A splutter of laughter greeted this _denouement_, for in truth Hannah
Vernon was not distinguished for her beauty, being one of the plainest,
and at the same time the most good-natured of girls.

Lavender cried eagerly--

"Go on!  Make up some more," but Clemence from the dignity of seventeen
years felt bound to protest--

"I don't think you--_ought_!  It's not your business.  Mrs Vernon's a
friend, and she wouldn't be pleased.  To talk behind her back--"

"All right," agreed Darsie swiftly.  "Let's crack nuts!"

Positively she left one breathless!  One moment poised on imaginary
flights, weaving stories from the baldest materials, drawing allegories
of the lives of her friends, the next--an irresponsible wisp, with no
thought in the world but the moment's frolic; but whatever might be the
fancy of the moment she drew her companions after her with the magnetism
of a born leader.

In the twinkling of an eye the scene was changed, the Vernons with their
peculiarities were consigned to the limbo of forgotten things, while
boys and girls squatted on the rug scrambling for nuts out of a paper
bag, and cracking them with their teeth with monkey-like agility.

"How many can you crack at a time?  Bet you I can crack more than you!"
cried Darsie loudly.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE TELEGRAPH STATION.

The Garnetts' house stood at the corner of Sandon Terrace, and possessed
at once the advantages and drawbacks of its position.  The advantages
were represented by three bay windows, belonging severally to the
drawing-room, mother's bedroom, and the play-room on the third floor.
The bay windows at either end of the Terrace bestowed an architectural
finish to its flattened length, and from within allowed of extended
views up and down the street.  The drawback lay in the position of the
front door, which stood round the corner in a side street, on which
abutted the gardens of the houses of its more aristocratic neighbour,
Napier Terrace.  Once, in a moment of unbridled temper, Vie Vernon had
alluded to the Garnett residence as being located "at our back door,"
and though she had speedily repented, and apologised, even with tears,
the sting remained.

Apart from the point of inferiority, however, the position had its
charm.  From the eerie of the top landing window one could get a bird's-
eye view of the Napier Terrace gardens with their miniature grass plots,
their smutty flower-beds, and the dividing walls with their clothing of
blackened ivy.  Some people were ambitious, and lavished unrequited
affection on struggling rose-trees in a centre bed, others contented
themselves with a blaze of homely nasturtiums; others, again, abandoned
the effort after beauty, hoisted wooden poles, and on Monday mornings
floated the week's washing unashamed.  In Number Two the tenant kept
pigeons; Number Four owned a real Persian cat, who basked majestic on
the top of the wall, scorning his tortoiseshell neighbours.

When the lamps were lit, it was possible also to obtain glimpses into
the dining-rooms of the two end houses, if the maids were not in too
great a hurry to draw down the blinds.  A newly married couple had
recently come to live in the corner house--a couple who wore evening
clothes every night, and dined in incredible splendour at half-past
seven.  It was thrilling to behold them seated at opposite sides of the
gay little table, all a-sparkle with glass and silver, to watch course
after course being handed round, the final dallying over dessert.

On one never-to-be-forgotten occasion, suddenly and without the
slightest warning, bride and bridegroom had leaped from their seats and
begun chasing each other wildly round the table.  She flew, he flew; he
dodged, she screamed (one could _see_ her scream!) dodged again, and
flew wildly in an opposite direction.  The chase continued for several
breathless moments, then, to the desolation of the beholders, swept out
of sight into the fastnesses of the front hall.

Never--no, never--could the bitterness of that disappointment be
outlived.  To have been shut out from beholding the _denouement_--it was
_too_ piteous!  In vain Darsie expended herself on flights of
imagination, in vain rendered in detail the conversation which had led
up to the thrilling chase--the provocation, the threat, the defiance--
nothing but the reality could have satisfied the thirst of curiosity of
the beholders.  Would he kiss her?  Would he beat her?  Would she
triumph?  Would she cry?  Was it a frolic, or a fight?  Would the morrow
find them smiling and happy as of yore, or driving off in separate cabs
to take refuge in the bosoms of their separate families?  Darsie opined
that all would _seem_ the same on the surface, but darkly hinted at the
little rift within the lute, and somehow after that night the glamour
seemed to have departed from this honeymoon pair, and the fair seeming
was regarded with suspicion.

As regards the matter of distance, it took an easy two minutes to cover
the space between the front doors of the two houses, and there seemed an
endless number of reasons why the members of the different families
should fly round to consult each other a dozen times a day.  Darsie and
Lavender, Vie and plain Hannah attended the same High School; the
Garnett boys and John Vernon the same Royal Institute, but the fact that
they walked to and from school together, and spent the intervening hours
in the same class-rooms, by no means mitigated the necessity of meeting
again during luncheon and tea hours.  In holiday times the necessity
naturally increased, and bells pealed incessantly in response to tugs
from youthful hands.

Then came the time of the great servants' strike.  That bell was a
perfect nuisance; ring, ring, ring the whole day long.  Something else
to do than run about to open the door for a pack of children!

The two mistresses, thus coerced, issued a fiat.  Once a day, and no
oftener!  All arrangements for the afternoon to be made in the morning
_seance_, the rendezvous to be _outside_, not _inside_ the house.

After this came on the age of signals; whistlings outside the windows,
rattling of the railings, comes through letter-boxes and ventilation
grids, even--on occasions of special deafness--pebbles thrown against
the panes!  A broken window, and a succession of whoops making the air
hideous during the progress of an extra special tea party, evoked the
displeasure of the mistresses in turns, and a second verdict went forth
against signals in all forms, whereupon the Garnetts and Vernons in
conclave deplored the hard-heartedness of grown-ups, and set their wits
to work to evolve a fresh means of communication.

"S'pose," said Russell, snoring thoughtfully, "s'pose we had a
telegraph!"

"S'pose we had an airship!  One's just as easy as the other.  Don't be a
juggins."

But Russell snored on unperturbed.

"I don't mean a _real_ telegraph, only a sort--of _pretend_!  There's
our side window, and your back windows.  If we could run a line across."

"A line of _what_?"

"String.  Wire.  Anything we like."

"S'pose we _did_ fix it, what then?"

"Send messages!"

"How?"

Russell pondered deeply.  He was the member of the family who had a
natural aptitude for mechanism; the one who mended toys, and on occasion
was even consulted about mother's sewing-machine and escapes of gas,
therefore he filled the place of engineer-royal and was expected to take
all structural difficulties upon his own shoulders.  He pondered,
blinking his pale blue eyes.

"Can't send messages in the usual way--too difficult.  If the cord were
double, we might have a bag and switch it across."

Ha! the audience pricked its ears and sat alert, seeing in imagination
the tiny cord swung high in space above the dividing ground, stretching
from window to window, fastened securely on the sills, "somehow,"
according to the girls, the boys critically debating the question of
ways and means, strong iron hoops, for choice, clamped into the
framework of the windows.

"How would the messages be sent?"

"In a bag, of course.  Put the letter in the bag; then we'd pull and
pull, and it would work round and round, till it arrived at the opposite
end."

A stealthy exchange of glances testified to the general realisation of
the fact that it would take a _long_ time to pull, a much longer time,
for instance, than to run round by the road, and deposit the missive in
the letter-box, a still unforbidden means of communication.  Every one
realised the fact, but every one scorned to put it into words.  What was
a mere matter of time, compared with the glory and _eclat_ of owning a
real live telegraph of one's own?

The first stage of the proceedings was to obtain the parental consent,
and this was secured with an ease and celerity which was positively
disconcerting.  When mothers said, "Oh, yes, dears, certainly--certainly
you may try!" with a smile in their eyes, a twist on their lips, and a
barely concealed incredulity oozing out of every pore, it put the
youngsters on their mettle to succeed, or perish in the attempt.  The
mothers obviously congratulated themselves on a project which would
provide innocent amusement for holiday afternoons, while they inwardly
derided the idea of permanent success.

"We'll show 'em!" cried Harry darkly.  "We'll let 'em see!"

The next point was to decide on the window in each house which should
act as telegraph station.  In the case of the Vernons there was
obviously no alternative, for the third-floor landing window possessed
qualifications far in excess of any other, but with the Garnetts two
rival factions fought a wordy combat in favour of the boys' room and the
little eerie inhabited by Lavender, each of which occupied equally good
sites.

"Stick to it!  Stick to it!" were Harry's instructions to his younger
brother.  "They can't put the thing up without us, so they're bound to
come round in the end, and if we've got the telegraph station, it will
give us the whip hand over them for ever.  It's our room, and they've
jolly well got to behave if they want to come in.  If they turn rusty,
we'll lock the door, and they'll have to be civil, or do without the
telegraph.  Let 'em talk till they're tired, and then they'll give in,
and we'll go out and buy the cord."

And in the end the girls succumbed as predicted.  Lavender's pride in
owning the site of the great enterprise weakened before the tragic
picture drawn for her warning, in which she saw herself roused from
slumber at unearthly hours of the night, leaning out of an opened window
to draw a frozen cord through bleeding hands.  She decided that on the
whole it would be more agreeable to lie snugly in bed and receive the
messages from the boys over a warm and leisurely breakfast.

These two great points arranged, nothing now remained but the erection
of the line itself, and two strong iron hoops having been fixed into the
outer sills of the respective windows a fine Saturday afternoon
witnessed the first struggle with the cord.

Vie Vernon and plain Hannah unrolled one heavy skein, threaded it
through their own hoop, and lowered the two ends into the garden, where
John stood at attention ready to throw them over the wall.  Darsie and
Lavender dropped their ends straight into the street, and then chased
madly downstairs to join the boys and witness the junction of the lines.
Each line being long enough in itself to accomplish the double journey,
the plan was to pull the connected string into the Garnett station, cut
off the superfluous length, and tie the ends taut and firm.  Nothing
could have seemed easier in theory, but in practice unexpected
difficulties presented themselves.  The side street was as a rule
singularly free from traffic, but with the usual perversity of fate,
every tradesman's cart in the neighbourhood seemed bent on exercising
its horse up and down its length this Saturday afternoon.  No sooner
were lines knotted together in the middle of the road than the
greengrocer came prancing round the corner, and they must needs be
hastily untied; secured a second time, the milkman appeared on
incredibly early rounds, reined his steed on its haunches, and scowled
fiercely around; before there was time to rally from his attack a
procession of coal-carts came trundling heavily past.  By this time also
the frantic efforts of the two families had attracted the attention of
their enemies, a body of boys, scathingly designated "the Cads," who
inhabited the smaller streets around and waged an incessant war against
"the Softs," as they in return nicknamed their more luxurious
neighbours.

The Cads rushed to the scene with hoots and howls of derision; white-
capped heads peered over bedroom blinds; even the tortoiseshell cats
stalked over the dividing walls to discover the cause of the unusual
excitement.  Clemence, with the sensitiveness of seventeen years,
hurried round the corner, and walked hastily in an opposite direction,
striving to look as if she had no connection with the scrimmage in the
side street.  Darsie read the Cads a lecture on nobility of conduct,
which they received with further hoots and sneers.  Plain Hannah planked
herself squarely before the scene of action with intent to act as a
bulwark from the attack of the enemy.  The three boys worked with
feverish energy, dreading the appearance of their parents and an edict
to cease operations forthwith.

The first lull in the traffic was seized upon to secure the knots, when
presto! the line began to move, as Russell the nimble-minded hauled
vigorously from the upstairs station, whence he had been dispatched a
few moments before.  The Cads yelled and booed as the first glimmering
knowledge of what was on foot penetrated their brains; they grouped
together and consulted as to means of frustration; but with every moment
that passed yards of line were disappearing from view, and the skeins in
the streets were rapidly diminishing in size.  Presently there was not a
single coil left, and a cheer of delight burst from the onlookers as
they watched the cord rise slowly off the ground.  Now with good luck
and the absence of vehicles for another two minutes the deed would be
done, and the Garnett-Vernon telegraph an accomplished fact; but alas!
at this all-important moment one line of string caught in an ivy stem at
the top of a garden wall, and refused to be dislodged by tuggings and
pullings from below.  The Cads raised a derisive cheer, and to add to
the annoyances of the moment a cab rounded the corner, the driver of
which pulled up in scandalised amaze on finding the road barricaded by
two stout lines of string.

His strictures were strong and to the point, and though he finally
consented to drive over the hastily lowered line, he departed shaking
his whip in an ominous manner, and murmuring darkly concerning police.

"On to the wall, John.  Quick!  Climb up and ease it over.  If we don't
get it up in a jiffy we shall have the bobbies after us!" cried Harry
frantically, whereupon John doubled back into his own garden, and by
perilous graspings of ivy trunks and projecting bricks scaled to the top
and eased the line from its grip.

"Right-ho!" he cried, lifting his face to the opposite window.  "Pull,
Russell! _pull_ for your life!"

Russell pulled; a second time the double thread rose in the air.  Darsie
jumped with excitement; Lavender clasped her hands, all white and tense
with suspense, plain Hannah ran to and fro, emitting short, staccato
croaks of delight; Harry stood in manly calm, arms akimbo, a beam of
satisfaction broadening his face.  That smile, alas! gave the last touch
of exasperation to the watching Cads.  To stand still and behold the
line vanishing into space had been in itself an ordeal, but Harry's
lordly air, his strut, his smile--these were beyond their endurance!
With a rallying shout of battle they plunged forward, grabbed at the
ascending cord, hung for a dizzy moment suspended on its length, then
with a final cheer felt it snap in twain and drag limply along the
ground.

Alas for Harry and for John--what could they do, two men alone, against
a dozen?  The girls screamed, declaimed, vowed shrill revenge, but in
the matter of practical force were worse than useless.  Even with
Russell's aid the forces were hopelessly uneven.  Harry stood looking on
gloomily while the Cads, chortling with triumph, galloped down the road,
trailing behind them the long lengths of cord; then, like a true
Englishman, being half-beaten, he set his teeth and vowed to conquer, or
to die.

"They think we're sold, but they'll find their mistake!  We'll get up at
five on Monday morning and have the thing in working trig before they
have opened their silly eyes."

This programme being duly enacted, the telegraph stations remained for
years as an outward and visible sign of the only piece of work which
Harry Garnett was ever known to accomplish before the hour of his
belated breakfast.



CHAPTER THREE.

AUNT MARIA.

Among the crowd of relations near and far most families possess one
relation _par excellence_, who stands out from all the rest by reason
either of generosity, aggravatingness, or strength of character.
Sometimes this relation is an uncle; more often it is an aunt; almost
invariably he or she is unmarried or widowed, because the single state
naturally allows more time and energy for interests beyond the personal
household.

The Garnetts' relation _par excellence_ was Aunt Maria--_Lady_ Maria as
they erroneously called her, being unsophisticated in the niceties of
the peerage.  Her rightful cognomen was Lady Hayes, and she was the
elderly, very elderly, widow of an estimable gentleman who had been
created a Baronet in recognition of services rendered to his political
party.  The Garnetts felt that it was very stylish to possess an aunt
with a title, and introduced her name with an air when the Vernons grew
superior on the subject of "the grounds."  Lady Hayes was an eccentric
individual who inhabited a beautiful old country house in the Midlands,
from which base she was given to suddenly swooping down upon her
relations, choosing by preference for these visits the times when
carpets had been sent away to be cleaned, or the maids granted days off
to visit relations in the country.  Then Lady Hayes would appear,
announce her intention of staying a couple of nights, declare her
unwillingness to give the slightest trouble, and proceed to request that
her maid should be accommodated with a room next to her own, and that
they should both be supplied with a vegetarian diet, supplemented by
glasses of sterilised milk at intervals of every two hours.  Sometimes
the vegetarianism gave place to a diet of minced beef, but whatever
might be the diet of the moment it was invariably something which no one
else wanted to eat, and which took about three times as long to prepare
as the entire rations for the household dinner of ten.

It was at the close of the Midsummer term, when the Garnett family were
blissfully preparing for the yearly migration to the sea, that a letter
from Aunt Maria fell like a bombshell upon the peaceful scene.  This
year the holiday promised to be even more blissful than usual, for the
Vernons had secured a second farmhouse, not ten minutes' walk from their
own, and connected with the sea by the same fascinating field-paths.  A
farm and the sea!  Could there possibly exist a more fascinating
combination?  The young people sniffed in advance the two dear,
distinctive odours which, more than anything else, presented the scenes
before them--the soft, cowy-milky scent of the farm, the salt, sharp
whiff of the brine.  From morn till night, at every available moment,
they discussed the day's programme--feeding animals, calling the cows,
bathing, picnicking on the sands, crab-hunting, mountain climbing.
Excitement grew until it really seemed impossible to exist through the
intervening days, and then the bombshell fell!  A letter arrived by an
evening post, when Mr and Mrs Garnett were enjoying the one
undisturbed hour of the day.  It bore the Hayes crest, and was written
in Aunt Maria's small, crabbed handwriting--

"My dear Emily,--

"I propose, all being well, to pay you a short visit from Tuesday to
Thursday next, twelfth to fifteenth instant.  Please let me have the
same rooms as on my last visit.  I am at present living on Benger's
food, and must ask you to see that it is made freshly for each meal, in
a _perfectly clean, enamelled saucepan_.

"The chief object of my visit is to bring back one of your three
daughters to stay with me during the summer vacation.  I have been
feeling somewhat lonely of late, and my doctor recommends young society,
so it has occurred to me that in obeying his instructions I might at the
same time afford pleasure and benefit to one of your family.  Should I
become interested in the child it might be to her advantage hereafter,
but it must be understood that I can make no promises on this point.

"The eighteen months which have elapsed since my last visit have
somewhat dimmed my remembrance of your girls, so that I must see them
again before deciding as to which of the three I should prefer as a
companion.

"With love to William and yourself,--

"Believe me, my dear Emily,--

"Your affectionate Aunt,--

"Maria Hayes."

Mrs Garnett read this communication in silence, handed it to her
husband, and watched him flush and frown over the perusal.

"Does not even go through the form of asking our consent!"

"No!  That's Aunt Maria all over.  You could hardly imagine that she
would.  Oh dear!  Oh dear!  I'm afraid, Will--I'm _afraid_ she will have
to go!"

"Poor little kiddie, yes!  How she will hate it!  Just at this moment
when they are all wild with joy at the thought of their holiday with the
Vernons.  It seems positively brutal!"

"Oh, it does.  I am so sorry for her--whichever it may be--but one must
sometimes be cruel to be kind.  We can't afford--I am not mercenary, as
you know--but with our means we _can't_ afford to refuse any possible
advantage for our girls!  The sacrifice of a summer holiday ought not to
weigh against that."

"No, you're right, quite right.  So be it then.  Write and tell her to
come, only I tell you plainly my holiday's spoiled...  With Darsie
gone--"

"Dear! she has not chosen yet."

"Dear! you know perfectly well--"

They looked at each other, smiling, rueful, half-ashamed.  It seemed
like treason to the other girls, this mutual acknowledgment that Darsie
was the flower of the flock, the child of the six to whom all strangers
were attracted as by a magnet.  Clarence and Lavender were equally as
dear to the parents' hearts, but there was no denying the existence of a
special and individual pride in the fascinations of Darsie.

Mr Garnett turned aside with an impatient shrug.

"There's one thing, Emily, _you_ must tell her when it is settled!
There'll be a tremendous scene.  I flatly refuse--"

"Very well, dear, very well; I'll do it.  But it's not decided yet,
remember, and one can never be sure.  I'd better break the idea to the
girls before Aunt Maria comes, and let them get over the first
excitement.  To-night would be a good opportunity.  You will be out
late, so would be spared the scene!"

"Bless you, Emily!  I'm a coward, I know, but I _should_ be grateful.  I
can't answer for what I should do if Darsie cried, and begged my
protection.  Women have twice the pluck of men in these affairs!"

Nevertheless it was with a quaking heart that Mrs Garnett broached the
object of Aunt Maria's proposition over the schoolroom tea that
afternoon, and her nervousness was not decreased by the smilingly
unperturbed manner in which it was received.  Never, never for a moment
did it appear possible to the three girls that such a proposition could
be seriously discussed.

"_So_ likely!" sneered Clemence with a fine disdain.  "Give up all the
fun and excitement of the sea with the Vernons, to _browse_ with Aunt
Maria.  _So_ likely, to be sure!"

"Poor dear old love!  She _is_ deluded.  Thinks it would be a pleasure
and benefit, does she.  I wouldn't take a thousand pounds--"

Thus Lavender.  Darsie went a step farther in tragic declamation.

"I'd drown myself first!  To sit there--panting, in hot rooms, on
Benger's food, and know that all the others were bathing and running
wild on the shore--I'd burst!  I'd run away in an hour--"

"Dears, it's a beautiful old place.  There are gardens, and lawns, and
horses, and dogs.  Cows, too!  I am sure there are cows--she used to
keep a herd of Jerseys.  You could see them being milked."

"Welsh cows are good enough for me.  I don't need Jerseys.  _Or_ lawns!
Give me the free, untrammelled countryside!

"`And to see it reflected in eyes that I love.'"

Darsie paraphrased a line of the sweet old ballad, singing it in a
clear, bell-like voice to a pantomime of clasped hands and rolling eyes.
"It would be bad enough in an ordinary year, but to rend us apart from
the Vernons--oh, no, it's unthinkable!"

"You have the Vernons near you all the year, dear.  Aunt Maria only asks
for eight weeks.  There are occasions in life when it does not do to
think only of our own pleasure."

Silence.  A note in the mother's voice had startled her hearers into the
conviction that the invitation must be regarded seriously, and not
tossed aside as a joke.  A lacerating suspicion that the authorities
were in favour of an acceptance pierced like a dart.

"Mother!  What do you mean?  You couldn't _possibly_ be so cruel--"

"Mother, you don't mean--."

"Mother, what _do_ you mean?"

"I mean that you ought to go, dears, which ever one of you is asked.
Aunt Maria is an old lady, and she is lonely.  Her doctor has ordered
cheerful companionship.  Moreover, she has been a kind friend to father
in the past, and has a right to expect some consideration in return.  If
you went in the right spirit, you could be of real use and comfort, and
would have the satisfaction of doing a kind deed."

Darsie set her lips in a straight line, and tilted her chin in the air.

"Couldn't pretend to go in the right spirit!  I'd be in a tearing rage.
Somebody else can have the `satisfaction,' and I'll go to the sea."

"Darsie, dear, that's naughty!"

"I _feel_ naughty, mother.  `Naughty' is a mild word.  _Savage_!  I feel
savage.  It's too appalling.  What does father say?  I'm sure he would
never--"

"Father feels as I do; very disappointed for our own sakes and for yours
that our happy party should be disturbed, but he never shirks a
disagreeable duty himself, and he expects his children to follow his
example."

Lavender instantly burst into tears.

"It's always the way--always the way!  It was too good to be true.  We
might have known that it was.  She'll choose me, and Hannah will go
without me.  We'd planned every day--fishing, and bathing, and making
hay, and I shall be mewed up in a close carriage, and have meals of
nuts--and n-n-nobody to talk to.  Oh, I can't--I can't bear it!  I wish
I could die and be buried--I _cannot_ bear it--"

"You won't have to bear it.  She'll choose me.  I'm the eldest, and the
most of a companion."  Clemence spoke with the calmness of despair, her
plump cheeks whitening visibly, her pale eyes showing a flush of red
around the lids.  "Of course, if it's my duty, I must go--but I'd as
soon be sent to prison!  I'm feeling _very_ tired, and thought the
holiday would set me up.  Now, of course, I shall be worse.  Eight weeks
alone with Aunt Maria would try anybody's nerves.  I shall be a wreck
all winter, and have neuralgia till I'm nearly mad."

"Nonsense, darling!  If you are so tired, the rest and quiet of The
Towers will be just what you need; and as we don't know yet which one of
you Aunt Maria will wish as a companion, it is a pity for you all to
make yourselves miserable at once.  Why not try to forget, and hope for
the best!  Surely that would be the wiser plan."

The three girls looked at each other in eloquent silence.  Easy to talk.
Forget, indeed.  As if they _could_!  Mother didn't really believe what
she said.  She was making the best of it, and there were occasions when
making the best of it seemed just the most aggravating thing one could
do.

It was a relief to the girls when Mrs Garnett was summoned from the
room on household business, and they were left to themselves.  A craving
for sympathy was the predominant sensation, and prompted the suggestion,
"Let's wire to the Vernons," which was followed by a stampede upstairs.
The telegraph was a sufficiently new institution to appear a pleasure
rather than a toil, even though a message thus dispatched was an
infinitely longer and more laborious effort than a run round the
terrace, so to-day a leaf was torn from the note-book, a dramatic
announcement penned and placed in the hanging-bag, with its jingling
bell of warning, and the three girls took it in turns to pull at the
cord till the missive arrived at its destination.  Attracted by the
sound of the bell, Vie and plain Hannah stood at the window awaiting the
communication, read over its contents, and stood silent and dismayed.
The Garnetts, watching from afar, realised the dramatic nature of that
pause, and thrilled in sympathy.

"_One of us is going to be sent to prison instead of to the country_!"

"_Prison_!"  Vie and plain Hannah wagged their heads over the cipher,
hesitated long, pencil in hand, and, finally, in a frenzy of impatience,
which refused to be curbed even by loyalty to the telegraph itself,
dispatched an urgent summons to speech--

"_Come round and talk_!"

The Garnetts flew.  The Vernons, waiting upon the doorstep, escorted
them upstairs to the scantily furnished room which had first been a
nursery, then promoted to playroom, and, ultimately, when the more
juvenile name wounded the susceptibilities of its inmates, had become
definitely and proudly "the study."  The bureau in the corner was Dan's
special property, and might not be touched by so much as a finger-tip.
The oak table with three sound legs and a halting fourth, supported by
an ancient volume of _Good Words_, was Vie's property; John and plain
Hannah shared the dining-table, covered with the shabby green baize
cloth, which stood in the centre of the room.  There were a variety of
uncomfortable chairs, an ink-splashed drugget, and red walls covered
with pictures which had been banished from other rooms as they acquired
the requisite stage of decrepitude and grime.

The five girls surged into the room, faced each other, and burst into
eager speech--

"_Who's_ going to prison?"

"We don't know.  Wish we did!"

"What do you mean by prison?"

"Aunt Maria's!"

"Lady Maria's?"

"Lady Maria's!  One of us has to go and stay with her for eight weeks
instead of going with you to the sea."

Vie Vernon collapsed on to the nearest chair, and gasped for breath.
"Stu-pendous!" she murmured beneath her breath.  Vie had a new word each
season which she used to describe every situation, good and bad.  The
season before it had been "Weird!" this season it was "Stupendous," and
she was thankful for the extra syllable in this moment of emotion.
"It's really true?  You mean it in earnest?  _Why_?"

"Thinks it would be a pleasure to us, and that we should be cheery
companions.  _So_ likely, isn't it?"

"But--but surely your mother-- What does she say?"

"Preaches!  Oughtn't to think of ourselves.  Ought to show a right
spirit and go."

"Stu-pendous!" cried Vie once again.  Plain Hannah hoisted herself on to
the corner of the table, and hunched herself in thought.  She really was
extraordinarily plain.  Looking at her critically, it seemed that
everything that should have been a line had turned into a curve, and
everything that should have been a curve into a line; she was thick-set,
clumsy, awkward in gait, her eyes were small, her mouth was large, she
had a meagre wisp of putty-coloured hair, and preposterously thick
eyebrows several shades darker in hue, and no eyelashes at all.  Friends
and relations lavished much pity on poor dear Hannah's unfortunate
looks, but never a sigh did Hannah breathe for herself.  She was strong
and healthy, her sturdy limbs stood her in good stead in the various
games and sports in which she delighted, and she would not have
exchanged her prowess therein for all the pink cheeks and golden locks
in the world.  Hannah's manner, like her appearance, lacked grace and
charm; it was abrupt, forceful, and to the point.  She spoke now, chin
sunk in her grey flannel blouse, arms wrapped round her knees--

"Is she coming to see you before she chooses, or will it be done by
post?"

"She's coming!  Two days next week.  Isn't it too awful?  We were so
happy--the telegraph up, and the weather jolly, and holidays nearly
here.  `All unsuspecting of their doom the little victims played.'  And
then--_this_!  Holidays with Aunt Maria!  Even the third of a chance
turns me cold with dismay.  I couldn't bear--"

"You won't need to.  She won't have you.  She'll choose Darsie."

Darsie squealed in shrillest protest--

"No, no!  It's not fair.  She won't!  She can't!  It's always the eldest
or the youngest.  I'm the middle--the insignificant middle.  Why should
she choose me?"

"You are not so modest as a rule!  You know perfectly well that
strangers always _do_ take more notice of you than any one else.  You
are always the one who is fussed over and praised."

"Because I want to be!  This time I shan't.  I'll be just as sulky and
horrid as I can for the whole blessed time."

"You'll be there anyway, and you can't alter your face."

"My fatal beauty!" wailed Darsie, and wrung her hands in impassioned
fashion.  Then she looked critically from one sister to another, and
proceeded to candid criticisms of their charms.

"Clemence is not pretty, but she's _nice_!  If she did her hair better,
and sat up, and had a colour, and didn't poke her chin, she'd look quite
decent.  I should think it would be interesting to take some one who
_needed_ improving, and see what you could do.  Lavender's gawky, of
course, girls _are_ gawky at her age, but I shouldn't wonder if she grew
quite decent-looking in time.  Rest and quiet would do wonders!"

"Thank you, indeed!  You _are_ kind!"  The sisters bridled and tossed
their heads, by no means appeased by such prognostications of their
future charms.  "Certainly if she took _you_, she might teach you to be
modest!"

"Oh, dear, oh, dear, I don't want _any_ of you to go!"  Vie, the
peacemaker, rushed to the rescue.  She was just sixteen, younger than
Clemence, older than Darsie, attached almost equally to the two.
Lavender, of course, was quite too young for a companion, but then
Lavender and Hannah paired together; if she were absent, Hannah at a
loose end would demand entrance into those three-sided conferences which
made the joy of life.  The fear of such an incursion made Lavender at
that moment seem even more precious than her sisters.  Vie continued her
lament with bitter emphasis--

"_Too_ bad--_too_ hard--stupendous!  Spoil everything.  Horrid
interfering old thing!  If I were your parents I wouldn't--not for all
the money in the world, I wouldn't sacrifice a child to an old ogre like
that!  I'd keep my own children and let them be happy while they could,
but, of course, if she talks of duty...!  If there's one thing more
stupendous than another it's being put on one's honour!  It gives one
_no_ chance.  Well, you'll have to go, I suppose, and our holiday is
spoiled.  I've never been so disappointed in my life."

"Think of how _we_ feel!" croaked Clemence tragically, but this time the
tragedy did not ring so true, for since plain Hannah's verdict her
spirits had risen considerably.  Hannah was the shrewdest and cleverest
of all five girls, and her prophecies were proverbially correct.
Clemence felt sufficiently reassured to reflect that as the eldest in
years, she would do well to show an example of resignation.  She
lengthened her face, and added solemnly--

"I don't think you ought to talk like that about honour, Vie!  It ought
to be an incentive.  If I go, the only thing that will console me most
is the feeling that I am doing my duty!"

Vie stared, and the younger girls coughed in derisive chorus.

"Isn't it easy to be resigned for somebody else?" demanded plain Hannah
of the ceiling.  "You are _not_ going, my dear, and you know it.  Darsie
likes well enough to queen it as a rule, and now she's got to pay the
price.  That's the cost of good looks.  Thank goodness no one will ever
want to run off with _me_!--not even a staid old aunt.  Tell us about
your aunt, by the way--you've talked enough about yourselves.  Where
does she live, and what is she like, and what does she do, and what will
_you_ do when you're there?  Have any of you ever seen the place?"

"Not since we were old enough to remember, but mother has been and told
us all about it.  It's big, with a lodge, two lodges, and a park all
round, very rich, and grand, and respectable, and dull.  There are men-
servants to wait at table, and the windows are never open, and she
drives out every day in a closed carriage, and plays patience at night,
and wears two wigs, turn about, a week at a time.  Her cheeks are red,
the sort of red that is made up of little red lines, and never gets
brighter or darker, and she likes to be quiet and avoid excitement.  Oh,
imagine what it would be like to _choose_ to be quiet, and deliberately
run away from a fuss!  Can you imagine if you lived a thousand years
ever reaching such a pitch as that?"

Darsie held out both hands in dramatic appeal, and her hearers groaned
with unction.  It was impossible, absolutely beyond the power of
imagination to picture such a plight.  Each girl hugged to herself the
conviction that with her at least would remain immortal youth; that
happen what might to the rest of mankind, no length of years could numb
her own splendid vitality and _joie de vivre_.

Not even, and at the thought the three Garnetts sighed in concert, not
even Aunt Maria!



CHAPTER FOUR.

A DOUBLE PICNIC.

Only four days before Aunt Maria arrived to make her great decision!
The Garnetts were living in what Darsie graphically described as "the
hush before the storm," adored, condoned, and indulged by parents who
saw before them the pangs of separation, and by brothers shrewdly
expectant of parting spoils.

Clemence, Darsie, and Lavender were acutely conscious of the rarified
atmosphere by which they were surrounded, and only regretted its
necessarily limited duration.

"Let's take advantage of it!" cried Darsie, the diplomat.  "It's our
chance; we should be noodles if we let it slip.  Anything we ask now
they'll let us have.  It's like prisoners who can order what they like
for supper the night before they're hanged.  Let's think what we'd like,
and go in a body and petition mother.  She won't have the heart to
refuse!"

The sisters agreed enthusiastically, but were not rich in suggestions.
It is one of the curious things in life that whereas every day one is
brought up sharply against a dozen longings and ambitions, without the
fulfilment of which it seems impossible to live, yet if the sudden
question be put, "_What would you have_?" instantly the brain becomes a
blank, and not a single suggestion is forthcoming.  The Garnetts stared
at one another in labouring silence.  It was too late for parties; too
early for pantomimes, a definite gift, failed to meet the case, since
each girl thought with a pang, "What's the use?  I might not be here to
enjoy it!"  Extra indulgences, such as sitting up at night, or being
"let off" early morning practising, did not appear sufficiently
important, since, with a little scheming, these might be gained in
addition.  It was Lavender who at last succeeded in hitting the popular
taste.

"A picnic!  A real whole-day one this time.  Lunch in the woods at
Earley, tea in our old woman's cottage, walk over the fields to the
amphitheatre, and home by train from Oxholm.  Whoever goes with Aunt
Maria will be cheated of her holiday, for the well-behaved country
doesn't count.  If you have to wear gloves and walk properly, you might
as well be in town at once.  For the victim's sake we ought to have one
more day in the woods!"

Clemence and Darsie sparkled, for the programme was an opulent one,
combining as it did the two ordinary picnics into one.  The yearly
programme was that--"if you are good"--the Garnett family should be
taken for two half-day excursions into the country on two summer
Saturday afternoons, but though the woods and the amphitheatre were only
separated by three short miles, never yet had the two places been
visited together.  An all-day picnic seemed a regal entertainment,
worthy of the unique occasion.

"Ourselves and the Vernons!  Mrs Vernon to talk to mother, then they
won't have as much time to look after us.  When they begin on carpets
and curtains they forget everything else, and we can do as we like.  Do
you suppose Dan would come?"

"Sure he wouldn't."

"Why?"

"My dear!"

Clemence held out eloquent hands.  "Does he ever come?  He's a man, soon
going to college, and you are only `kids.'  I'm older than he is really;
a woman is always older than a man, but he doesn't like me.  We are not
_en rapport_."  Clemence tried hard to suppress a smirk of self-
consciousness at the use of the French term, while the two younger
sisters jeered and booed with the callous brutality of their kind.

"Ha, ha! aren't we fine?  Roll your r's a little more next time, my
dear.  It will sound miles better.  Your accent leaves much to be
desired.  Aren't we grown-up to-day?  Aunt Maria _would_ be impressed!
A little stay in Paris just to put on the accent, and it's wonderful to
think of what you might do!  _En rapport_!  Bet you daren't say that to
Dan!  Dare you to tell him that you are not _en rapport_!"

Clemence was seized with agitation, discerning through the innocent
words a thinly veiled threat.  If she didn't, Darsie _would_!

"Darsie!" she cried loudly.  "You mustn't tell; you must _not_!  It's
mean.  Only sneaky children repeat what is said in private.  Promise
this minute that you won't say a word!"

But Darsie, like her brothers, was keenly alive to the privilege of
holding a rod in pickle over an elder member of the family.  So long as
Clemence lived in fear of humiliating disclosure, so long might she
herself walk in safety, free from rebuffs.  She laid her head on one
side and smiled sweetly into her sister's face.

"I shouldn't like exactly, positively, to _promise_, don't you know, for
I _am_ such a creature of impulse.  If it rushed over me suddenly, it
might pop out, don't you know, bang! before I knew what I was about!  Of
course, on the other hand, I _might_ not--"

"Very well," snapped Clemence sharply, "then I stay at home!  It would
be no fun for _me_ to go for a picnic with that sort of thing hanging
over my head all the time.  I know very well how you'd behave--rolling
your eyes across the table, and beginning half-sentences, and
introducing `_en rapport_' every other moment.  If I'm going to be made
miserable, I'll be miserable at home.  You can go to our last picnic as
an undivided family without me, the eldest of the family, and I only
hope you'll enjoy it; that's all!"

"Oh, Darsie!" pleaded Lavender tragically, moved almost to tears by the
pathos of those last words, and Darsie shrugged her shoulders,
philosophically accepting her defeat.

"All right, I promise!  I'll hug the remembrance secretly in my own
breast.  It will cheer me through the dullest hours!"

Clemence bridled, but made no further protest.  To think of Darsie
chuckling in secret was not agreeable, but it was as nothing compared
with the humiliation of meeting Dan's grave stare, and seeing the curl
of his lip at the repetition of her high-sounding phrase.  As the
quickest way of changing the conversation she suggested an adjournment
to the morning-room, where mother sat busy over the eternal mending-
basket, to broach the picnic project without delay.

Mother agreed instantly, eagerly, indeed, so that there was something
almost uncanny in the unusualness of the situation.  To every demand,
every suggestion came the unfailing, "Yes, darlings!  Certainly,
darlings!"  Even the audacity of the double programme aroused no more
notice than the remark that it was an admirable idea.  Darsie, striking
while the iron was hot, went a step farther and attacked the subject of
lunch.

"Could we--for once--have something substantialler than sandwiches?
Chickens?"  She gasped at the audacity of the request, for chickens were
a state dish, reserved for occasions, and in summer for some inscrutable
reasons just because they were smaller cost more than ever.  "Chickens
cut up are so easy to eat.  We needn't have knives and forks.  And
little cobby dinner-rolls from the confectioner's, with crisp, browny
crust, cut open and stuffed with butter and potted meat, and little
green pieces of lettuce.  They had them that way at supper at the
Masons' party, and they were superb!  And cakes and fruit!  Do, mother,
let us have a real swagger lunch just for once!"

And mother said, "Yes, darling!" like a lamb, swallowing as it were
spring chickens and cobby rolls at a gulp.  It was impossible in giving
the invitation to the Vernons to refrain from a hint at the magnificence
of the preparations, though good manners would, of course, have prompted
silence on such a point.

The Vernons accepted with acclamation, all except Dan, who rudely
declared that he "refused with pleasure," when Darsie bearded him in his
den and proffered the invitation.  He was seated at his desk, for the
moment the only occupant of the workroom, and his manner was not
expressive of welcome to the new-comer.  He was a big, heavily built
youth, with a face which was oddly attractive despite irregular features
and a dull complexion.  Dark eyes looked at you straight and square
beneath bushy eyebrows; thin lips curved into the oddest, most
expressive of lines, the square chin had a fashion of projecting until
it seemed to become one of the most eloquent features in his face.

Close observation showed that there was a shadow of his upper lip, and
rumour had it that he shaved, actually _shaved_ every morning of his
life.  His huge hands had a grip of steel, but it was wonderful how deft
and gentle they could be on occasion.  Every album and collection in the
house was labelled by Dan, indexed by Dan, embellished with ornamental
flourishes and headlines, which Dan's big fingers alone had the power to
produce.  Now he leaned an elbow on the desk, turned round on his chair,
and tilted that eloquent chin in scorn.

"Picnic?  Not much.  Hate 'em like poison!  You don't want me!"

"We _do_ want you!  We shouldn't have asked you if we didn't.  Don't be
unsociable, Dan.  It's an extra special occasion, and it would be so
much jollier to be complete.  The boys will behave better if you're
there."

Dan's chin tilted still an inch higher.  That was of course, but--

"I hate a family crowd!" he pronounced tersely.  "If there were only one
or two, it wouldn't be so bad.  Usual programme, I suppose--pick flowers
and eat biscuits?  Not much in my line--thank you all the same.  Hope
you'll have a good time!"

"We're going to have a _real_ lunch--chickens and all sorts of good
things, and walk to Oxholm across the fields.  It will be much more
exciting than the old picnics have been."

"It might easily be that!  No, thank you, I'm off.  Some other day--"

"But we want you, Dan!  _I_ want you to come."

"But _I_ don't, you see.  There's the difference.  Sorry to disoblige."

Darsie regarded him silently, considered the point whether wrath or
pathos would be the most powerful weapon, decided rapidly in favour of
pathos, and sank with a sigh on to an opposite chair.

"Very well.  I _quite_ understand.  We wanted you especially because
this may be the last, the very last time that one of us girls has any
fun this summer, so of course it feels important.  But you are so much
older--it's natural that you shouldn't care.  I think you've been very
nice to be as much with us as you have been...  Dan!"

"Yes!"

"Hannah says it will be _me_!  That Aunt Maria is sure to choose me when
she comes.  Do you think she will?"

"Ten to one, I should say."

"Oh, but why?  _Why_?  How can you be so sure?"

Dan's dark eyes surveyed the alert little head, poised on the stem of
the graceful throat, his thin lips lengthened in the long, straight line
which showed that he was trying not to smile.

"Because--er, you appear to me the sort of girl that an erratic old
fossil would naturally prefer!"

"Ah-h!"--Darsie's dejection was deep--"Daniel, how cruel!"  It was a
comforting retaliation to address her tormentor by the name he so
cordially disliked, but she remembered her role, and looked dejected
rather than irate.  "I suppose that's true.  I _need_ discipline, and
she would naturally choose the worst of the three.  No one wants to be
disciplined instead of having a good time, but it may be good for me in
the end.  All the time you are at sea, happy and free, I shall be being
disciplined for my good...  Wednesday may be my last, my very last, glad
day..."

"Bah!  Rubbish!" snapped Dan, but he looked at the curly head, and felt
a pang of distaste.  The idea of Darsie Garnett sobered and disciplined
out of recognition was distinctly unpleasant.  He wriggled in his chair,
and said tentatively: "It will take more than one old lady to tame
_you_, young woman!  You'll have lots of fun yet--perhaps more than if
you'd stayed at home."

Darsie smiled with angelic resignation.

"Perhaps so, but it won't be the same _kind_ of fun.  New friends can
never be like old.  If she chooses me, I must go, because of my duty to
father and the rest, but it's going to _hurt_!  I feel,"--she waved her
arms dramatically in the air--"like a flower that is being torn out by
the roots!  I shall not live long in a strange soil...  Well, goodbye,
Dan; I won't bother you any more!  Thank you very much for all you've
done for me in the past."

Done!  Dan searched his memory, found therein inscribed a number of
snubs, rebuffs, and teasings, but nothing worthy of the thanks so
sweetly offered.

He felt a stirring of reproach.  Darsie was a decent kid--an amusing
kid; if she went away she would leave behind her a decided blank.
Looking back over the years, Darsie seemed to have played the leading
part in the historic exploits of the family.  She was growing into quite
a big kid now.  He glanced at her again quickly, furtively, and drummed
with his fingers on the desk--hardly a kid at all, almost grown up!

"Oh, that's all right; don't worry about that," he mumbled vaguely.
"What a grandiloquent kid you are!  I hope you'll have a better time
than you think, if you do go to visit your aunt."

"Thanks so much; I hope I may; and if at any time--_any_ time--I can do
anything to help you, or give you the least--the _very_ least--pleasure,
please let me know, Dan!  I can understand now how one feels when one
leaves home and faces the world!" said Darsie poignantly.  "G-goodbye!"

"Bye," said Dan coolly.  He leaned back in his chair, still thudding
with his fingers on the desk.  Darsie had reached the door and held it
open in her hands before he spoke again.  "What time did you say that
blessed old picnic is to start?"

"Wednesday.  Ten o'clock," said Darsie, and, like a true daughter of
Eve, spoke not one more word, but shut the door and left him to his
thoughts.

"Dan's coming!  You're not to say a word till the time, but he _is_!"
she announced to her sisters that evening; but when they questioned and
cross-questioned concerning the means whereby the miracle had been
wrought, she steadfastly refused to satisfy their curiosity.  That was
not their concern.  An inherent loyalty to Dan forbade that she should
make public the wiles by which he had been beguiled.



CHAPTER FIVE.

LEFT BEHIND!

Wednesday dawned bright and fair; it had not seemed possible that it
could be wet, and the party of twelve, with their baskets and hampers,
drove economically and gaily to the ferry in a three-horse omnibus, so
ostentatiously treating it as their own vehicle that the few alien
passengers sat abashed, and plainly felt themselves _de trop_.  Darsie's
prophecy had been fulfilled, for Dan appeared at the starting-point,
somewhat grim and sulky of demeanour, but obviously on picnic bent.  He
was the only member of the party whose hands were free of basket or
bundle, and when the omnibus trundled into sight he walked forward to
meet it and swung himself up to a place on top as though anxious to
convince beholders that he had no connection with the noisy crowd at the
corner, whereupon the two mothers smiled at each other in amused
reminiscent fashion.

The girls were dressed in white; the boys wore flannel trousers with
school blazers and caps.  Clemence had put on a veil to protect her
complexion; plain Hannah's sailor hat left yards of forehead bleakly
exposed.  Darsie wore her little Kodak swung across her shoulder in
jaunty military fashion.  She invariably carried a camera on such
occasions, and never by any chance used it to take any photographs; the
programme was so unalterable that it had ceased to attract any attention
among her companions.

The omnibus conveyed the party to the ferry, from whence an hourly boat
puffed several miles up the river to where the village of Earley stood
on the opposite bank.  It was an ancient and by no means luxurious
barque, impregnated from bow to stern with a hot, oily, funnelly smell
from which it was impossible to escape, and as travellers to Earley were
almost invariably on pleasure bent, the usual satellites were in
attendance.  There was an old man in a long coat who had played the same
ballads on the same old concertina with the same incredibly dirty
fingers for as long as memory could recall; there was an old woman with
a clean apron and a tray of gingerbread biscuits slung pendant from her
shoulders, who presented them to you for three a penny, and exclaimed,
"Bless yer little 'art!" when you paid for them yourself, because mother
said it was a pity to spoil your lunch.  Deary me! one _would_ have to
be old to have one's appetite--and a picnic appetite at that!--spoiled
by three gingerbread biscuits!  The sail to Earley would have been shorn
of one of its chief joys without these sticky sweets.  The absence of
the clean, smiling old woman would have been resented as a positive
crime.

The ferry at Earley was an old-fashioned affair, sloping over the muddy
shore to a little white pay-house with a clanky turnpike on either side.
Once past these turnpikes, the visitor found himself in the midst of
things with delightful suddenness.  A wide green stretch of grass lay
along the river bank, bordered by shady trees.  To the right stood a
stone hotel with gardens of brilliant flower-beds, and an array of
white-covered tables dotted down the length of the veranda.  Grand and
luxurious visitors took their meals in the hotel, but such a possibility
of splendour had never dawned upon the minds of the Garnetts or their
friends--as well might a wayfarer in Hyde Park think of asking for a cup
of tea at Buckingham Palace!  To-day a young girl stood in the porch of
the hotel and gazed at the procession as it passed.  She was arrayed in
a white serge coat and skirt, and wore a white sailor hat with a blue
band.  "Exactly like yours!" said Lavender easily, but Clemence shook
her head in sad denial.  _Her_ coat and skirt had been bought ready-made
at a sale, was an inch too short in the waist, and cockled at the seams;
her hat was last year's shape, while the girl in the porch had
just--_the_--very--latest and most perfect specimen of both.

"Horrid thing, lunching in hotels in clothes like that!  Some people
have all the luck!" said Clemence grudgingly, as she moved the heavy
basket from one hand to the other to screen it from the gaze of the
aristocratic eyes; and the girl in the porch spied it all the same, and
sighed to herself wistfully: "They are going picnicking--all those boys
and girls!  Oh, how lovely to be them.  How I _wish_ I were a big
family..." after the manner of the ungrateful people of this world, who
are so much occupied in envying the possessions of others that they have
no time left in which to be thankful for their own!

The woods lay not a hundred yards from the ferry itself--real, natural,
untrammelled woods, with grand old trunks standing up tall and straight
like the columns of a cathedral, and dear old gnarled roots which ran
along the ground, covered with lichens and soft green moss.  To young
people who spent their lives in one red-brick terrace looking out on
another red-brick terrace across the road, it was like a voyage into
fairyland to step within the cool, green shadow of the woods, to smell
the sweet, sharp smell of the earth, and watch the dapplings of sunlight
through the leaves overhead.  Even the boys succumbed to the spell, and
for the first half-hour asked nothing better than to roll about on the
grass, poke in the roots of trees, and speculate concerning rabbit-holes
and nests; but the half-hour over, one and all were convinced that
watches were wrong and they were right in deciding that it was beyond
all manner of doubt full time for lunch; so the cloth was spread on a
level piece of turf, and the good things were consumed with the
lingering enjoyment which they deserved.

Every one felt that, as lunch marked what was perhaps the most enjoyable
epoch of the whole day, it was his or her bounden duty to eat slowly and
to go on demanding helpings so long as the supply endured; and a certain
feeling of blankness descended when there was no longer any excuse for
lingering, inasmuch as nothing remained to be eaten but a dozen jam
puffs, which, as mother said, had been _meant_ to be very nice, but had
somehow failed to achieve success!  The paste, hard enough on top, was
inside of a damp and doughy consistence, and cook had used gooseberry
jam for the filling, thereby taking a mean advantage of absence from
home, when she _knew_ that the family detested gooseberry in tarts, and
steadily plumped for apricot instead.

"We'll give them to the little boy at the ferry.  _He_ won't be so
particular!"  Mrs Garnett said as she laid the rejected dainties on one
side and proceeded to pack the oddments which had been required for the
meal in one small basket, placing layers of paper in those left empty.
The young people looked at each other with raised eyebrows as they
watched these proceedings, the meaning of which they knew only too well.
It was forbidden to gather roots from the woods, but no authority had
dreamt of forbidding visitors to carry away _soil_, and this was just
what Mrs Garnett invariably insisted upon doing.  The red-brown earth,
rich with sweet fragments of leaf and twig, was too tempting to be
resisted when she thought of her poor pot-bound plants at home;
therefore, instead of swinging homewards with baskets light as air, the
boys were doomed to bear even heavier weights than on the outward
journey.

"Mother!" cried Clemence in a deep tone of protest.  "Not _yet_!
Remember the walk across the fields.  Plenty of time to get soil in the
Amphitheatre!"  And Mrs Garnett put down her trowel with quite a guilty
air and resigned herself to wait.

"Well!  Perhaps it would be best ...  Mrs Vernon and I would like an
hour's rest before going on.  What are _you_ going to do now?"

Every one waited for every one else, and no suggestion was forthcoming.
The boys were once more beginning to roll about on the grass, poking and
pulling at each other in a manner which foretold the beginning of war.
Clemence and Vie were gazing sentimentally through the branches.  Plain
Hannah, stretched flat along the ground, was barricading the movements
of a tiny beetle, and chuckling over its persistent efforts to outwit
her schemes.  Dan sat with arms clasped around his knees, a picture of
patience on a monument.  The sight of his twisted lips, his tilted,
disconsolate chin fired Darsie to action.  It was her doing that he was
here at all; it was her duty to make the time pass as agreeably as
possible.

"Sports!" she cried quickly.  "Competitive sports.  We'll each plan an
event, and take them in turns.  Dan shall be judge, and the one who gets
most marks shall have a prize."

"What prize?"

That was a stumper.  Darsie could suggest nothing better than a general
subscription.

"If we each paid a penny entrance--"

"Oh, be bothered the pennies!  I'll give a prize!" cried Dan loftily.
Darsie saw with joy that he had brisked up at the prospect of sports and
was already beginning to cast his eye around in professional manner,
taking in the lie of the land, the outstanding features of the position.
As judge and manager he was in his element, and each suggestion of an
event was altered and amended with a lordly superiority.  It is somewhat
difficult to introduce much variety into a programme of impromptu
sports, but one or two of this afternoon's events had the advantage of
novelty.  A flower-gathering race, for instance, the object of which was
to see how many varieties of wild flowers each competitor could gather
in a given time, and a Roman water-carrier event, which consisted in
balancing the hot-water jug on one's head and seeing how far one could
walk without spilling its tepid contents over neck and shoulders.  Plain
Hannah was the only one of the girls who took part in this event, and to
her joy succeeded in travelling a longer distance than any of the male
competitors.  The final and most elaborate event was the obstacle race,
without which no competition of the kind is ever considered complete,
and the united wits of the company were put to work to devise traps for
their own undoing.  Harry discovered two small trees whose trunks grew
so close together that it seemed impossible that any human creature
could squeeze between, and insisted upon it being done as a _sine qua
non_.  Russell decreed that competitors should travel over a certain
route without touching the ground, swinging themselves from branch to
branch like so many monkeys, and as girls were plainly disqualified for
this feat an alternative test was invented which should score equally to
their credit.  Hopping races, races complicated by arithmetical and
other such baffling problems, were also devised, and at the last moment
Darsie came forward with a thrilling novelty.

"Run to the hamper, turn round three times, seize a jam puff, eat it in
two bites, and hop back to the goal!"

"Good!" cried the judge approvingly, and after that the competitors
might storm and lament as they would; the event was fixed!

The two mothers had retired from the scene of the fray and with backs
resting against two friendly trees were peacefully discoursing on
household trials; there was no one to preach concerning indigestion, and
the perils of rapid eating; hot and gasping from their previous trials,
the competitors ran, twirled, hopped and gobbled, and finally subsided
in paroxysms of laughter on the mossy bank.  The sports were over; the
prize had fallen to Russell, as every one had known from the start that
it must inevitably do; he sat snoring with pride, waving aside Dan's
inquiries as to the nature of his prize in a gentlemanly manner worthy
of his reputation, until the two mothers, becoming conscious that the
afternoon was passing away, rose heavily from their seats and announced
that it was time to start on the second half of the day's expedition.

The three-mile walk lay for three parts of the way through fields, which
to the town-livers afforded a refreshing change from noisy and dusty
streets, and when the little village was reached, "our old woman's
cottage" was found to be as clean and neat and hospitably attractive as
of yore.  It was a tiny whitewashed cottage standing back from the lane
in a garden bright with old-fashioned flowers, and the stone-floored
kitchen boasted an old oak dresser and table which were the envy of all
beholders.

"They're always after it!" our old woman would announce, chuckling.
"Titled gentry I've had, driving up in their own carriage, a-coaxing and
wheedling so as never was.  `_No_,' I says, `they was my mother's afore
me, and her mother's afore that, and it's a poor tale if I can't have
the pleasure of them while _I_ live!  If it's waluable to you, it's
waluable to me, too.  That's only common sense...'  And what's your
fancy today, lovies? boiled eggs and buttered toast, same as afore?"

Boiled eggs and buttered toast it was, despite the protests of the
mothers, who thought that really, after such a lunch--!  And after tea
our old woman provided buttonholes for each member of the party, and
hobbled to the gate to see them off, assuring them, as was her yearly
custom, that "the gamekeepers was getting very crusty of late, but you
leave the roots alone and nobody can't say nothing about a few bits of
flowers."  That yearly threat of the gamekeeper lent a _soupcon_ of
excitement to the scramble over the sloping woods, which surrounded as
an amphitheatre a deep green meadow through which meandered a tiny
stream.

At any moment, as it appeared, a stalwart figure in velveteen bearing a
gun over his shoulder might appear round the trunk of a tree, demanding
your licence or your life.  It was interesting to discuss exactly what
you would do or say under the circumstances, and the very worst thing in
punishments which could possibly be your fate!

To-day, however, no such interruption took place, and the dear old
playground looked, if possible, more beautiful than ever.  The ground
was carpeted with buttercups, and when one stood on the top of the steep
banks and looked down on the green and the gold, and caught glimpses of
the blue sky beyond--well, it was as near an approach to fairyland as
one could hope to find within twenty miles of a big manufacturing town.

Mrs Garnett packed her basket full of the soft, loamy soil; the girls
roamed up and down making up bouquets of wild roses, honeysuckle, and
fragrant meadowsweet; the boys were blissfully happy, risking life and
limb in an exciting endeavour to travel from top to bottom of the bank
without once touching grass.  An occasional tree-trunk was permitted as
a foothold, otherwise you swung yourself from one branch to another, or
took flying leaps into space, and trusted to fate to catch hold of
something before you fell.

Russell's hairbreadth escapes would have terrified his mother had she
been there to see, but the boys were wise in their generation and had
quietly worked their way round to the opposite bank before beginning
their experiments.  It took a considerable time to call them back and
rally forces in time to catch the eight o'clock train, and it was a
dishevelled and by no means aristocratic-looking party which climbed
over the high stone stile leading into the high-road.

It seemed hard luck that this last mile, when every one was feeling
tired and a trifle flat, should have to be traversed along a dusty,
uninteresting road, and the straggly line grew even farther and farther
apart as the distance to the station decreased.  Dan led the way,
walking in the middle of the road, his head flung back with the old
proud air of detachment.  The two mothers plodded steadily in the rear.
Russell, scratched and dusty, and looking more like a street arab than a
youth renowned for gentlemanly demeanour, scuffled in the gutter,
kicking up the gathered dust which enveloped him as in a cloud; Harry
and John bore the big hamper slung on a stick, the ends of which they
frequently released for the purpose of straightening their backs and
rubbing their tired hands.  Plain Hannah limped on the sideway, being
afflicted with corns which, as she expressed it, always "came on" at the
end of a day's pleasuring.  Vie and Clemence, arm-in-arm, were deep in
sentimental conclave.  Darsie, the last of the line, hung back of intent
until a curve in the road hid the others from sight.  A shadow of
melancholy had descended upon her spirit during the last hour; that fear
of "the last time" which at times makes cowards of us all, was strong
upon her; the possibility of separation suddenly became a terror which
gripped her breath and left her faint and weak.

Mother--Father--Home!  The dear delights of the sea.  Could she--could
she _bear_ to give them up?  Darsie whimpered miserably, and stopped
short in the middle of the road to pull out her handkerchief, and wipe a
threatening tear.  She really did not think she could, and yet every one
seemed to take it for granted that Aunt Maria's choice would fall upon
herself.  Was there nothing, nothing that she could do to lessen the
probability?  Nothing to make herself look ugly, unattractive, unsuited
for the post of lady's companion?

A stranger walking along the high-road at this moment would have been
amused to see a pretty, disconsolate-looking young girl deliberately
twisting her features into one grimace after another, and critically
examining the effect in the back of a small silver watch.  Every new
grimace necessitated a pause for inspection, so that the distance
between Darsie and her companions increased more and more, until on
turning the next corner of the winding road she was surprised to find no
one in sight--surprised and a trifle startled, for the early dusk was
already casting its shadow over the landscape, and the solitude of a
country road has in it something eerie to a lifelong dweller in towns.
Darsie forgot her grimaces and set off at a trot to make up lost ground,
and even as she ran a sound came from afar which quickened the trot into
a run--the scream of an engine! the engine of the approaching train
which was to bear the picnickers back to town.

The next turn of the road showed that the rest of the party had taken
alarm also, for the flying figures of Vie and Clemence could be seen
disappearing in the distance, evidently following hastily after those in
front.

"They'll catch it--they'll rush down the steps just as it's going to
start, bundle in anyhow, into different carriages--never miss me--go
off, never know I'm not there till they get out!"  These thoughts rushed
through Darsie's head as she ran gaspingly along the dusty road.  It was
imperative that she must catch up to her friends--to be left behind,
without a penny in her pocket to buy a ticket, would be too awful for
words.  The shriek of the engine had given place to a repeated snort
which was momentarily growing slower and less pronounced; the train was
slackening speed before drawing up at the platform.

Faster!  Faster!  One rush to reach the goal!  Darsie set her teeth and
put on a last desperate spurt, caught her foot on an outstanding stone
of the roadway, and fell heavily to the ground.



CHAPTER SIX.

DAN TO THE RESCUE.

There were no bones broken; she was not seriously hurt; but one has to
try for oneself the experiment of running at full tilt, and while so
doing to pitch forward at full length on the ground, to realise how
extremely disagreeable and disconcerting it can be.  Darsie dragged
herself slowly to a sitting position, and sat dazed and stupefied, a
forlorn, dust-encrusted figure, with hat tilted rakishly on one side,
and the palm of her right hand scratched to bleeding where it had
dragged along the stony ground.  She blinked and stared, and
mechanically brushed at her blackened skirts, but it was several moments
before remembrance of her position returned to her brain, and with it
the realisation of the consequences of delay.  She scrambled to her
feet, ran forward for a few paces, and stopped short with a sharp groan
of pain.  She had bruised her knees as well as her hand, and the rapid
movement was quite startlingly painful; she fell into a limp, straining
her head upwards to peep over the hedgerow at the road beyond.  And
then, clear and distinct after the interval of silence, came another
sharp whistle, another laborious puff, puff, puff.

The train was leaving the station, and she was left behind!

Darsie stopped short, and leaned against the hedge.  There was no longer
any need to hurry.  Either her absence had been discovered or it had
not, and a few minutes' time would settle that question once for all.
It soothed her to pretend that there was a chance that she might find
some one waiting her arrival on the platform, but at the bottom of her
heart she had little hope of such a possibility.  As members of a large
family whose parents were not rich enough to pay for the modern plethora
of nurses and governesses, the Garnetts and Vernons had been brought up
to be independent, and to fend for themselves, hence the two mothers
would not be so anxious to count the number of their brood, to see that
each member was safe and sound, as would have been the parents of
smaller, more indulged families.

There would be a rush for tickets, a hurried glance around on emerging
from the office, the signal of waving hands, and bobbing heads from half
a dozen windows, a quick leap into the nearest seats, and off they would
all steam, panting and puffing, congratulating themselves on their
escape.

No, Darsie told herself, it was stupid to pretend; certainly, quite
certainly she was left behind; nevertheless, when two or three minutes
later she reached the top of the railway bridge and peered over the
stone wall, it was with quite a big pang of dismay that she beheld the
empty platform.  Not a soul!  Not a single soul except a cross-looking
porter sitting astride a barrow, with his hands thrust into his trousers
pockets.

Anything less promising in the shape of a forlorn hope it would be
difficult to imagine, but the circumstances offered no alternative.
Darsie took her courage in both hands and marched boldly towards him.

"Please will you tell me the time of the next train from town?"

The porter rolled his eye sideways, surveyed her up and down, formed an
evidently poor opinion, and without a change of position muttered a curt
reply--

"Ten-thirty."

"Ten-thirty!"  Dismay at the lateness of the hour struggled with wounded
pride at the man's lack of respect.  Half-past ten before any one could
come to the rescue; three long hours of chill and darkness, with no one
to speak to, and nowhere to go!  Darsie threw the thought aside with the
impetuous incredulity of youth.

"When's the next train to town?"

"Nine-ten."

That was better!  Nine-ten.  If she could manage to travel by that train
she would arrive at the terminus in abundance of time to prevent any one
starting by the next stopping train.  It was all easy--perfectly easy,
except for the want of a miserable eightpence, but, alas! for the moment
eightpence seemed as inaccessible as eighty pounds.  Darsie bent a
scrutinising glance upon the porter's downcast face.  "He looks about as
disagreeable as he can be, but he's a human creature; he must have
_some_ heart!  Perhaps he's in trouble, too, and it's soured his
disposition.  It would mine!  I just _hate_ it when things go wrong.  I
don't in the least see why I shouldn't have a ticket on account!  I'll
see what I can do."

She coughed and ventured tentatively--

"I missed the last train."

"Did ye!" said the porter coldly.  It was not a question; there was no
flicker of the interest of a question in his voice, only a dreary
indifference which seemed to demand what in the world you were thinking
of to trouble him about a stupidity which had happened twenty times a
day throughout twenty years of his service on the line.  Darsie drew
herself up with a feeling of affront.  He was a rude, ill-mannered man,
who ought to be taught how to speak to ladies in distress.  She would
ask her father to complain to the railway!

What were porters paid for but to make themselves useful to passengers?
She drew herself up in haughty fashion, then as suddenly collapsed as
her eye rested on her dusty boots and blackened, bloodstained skirt.
Ridiculous to act the grand lady with such handicaps as these!  She drew
a sharp breath, and said in a voice of childlike appeal--

"I'm left behind!  My friends have gone on.  It's very awkward!"

"Are ye?" asked the porter indifferently.  He took one hand out of his
pocket and pointed woodenly to the right.  "Waiting-room first door.  Ye
can sit there!"

Of all the callous, cold-blooded--!  Darsie turned with a swing and
marched forward into the bleak little cell which had the audacity to
call itself a first-class waiting-room, seated herself on a leather-
covered bench which seemed just the most inhospitable thing in the way
of furniture which the mind of man could conceive, and gave herself up
to thought.  Never, never so long as she lived would she ever again
leave home without some money in her pocket!  How in the name of all
that was mysterious could she contrive to possess herself of eightpence
within the next hour?  "Our old woman" would lend it with pleasure, but
Darsie shrank from the idea of the darkening country road with the dread
of the town-dweller who in imagination sees a tramp lurking behind every
bush.  No, this first and most obvious suggestion must be put on one
side, and even if she could have humbled herself to beg from the porter,
Darsie felt an absolute conviction that he would refuse.  At the farther
side of the station there stretched a small straggling village.  Surely
somehow in that village--!  With a sudden inspiration Darsie leaped to
her feet and approached the porter once more.  Into her mind had darted
the remembrance of the manner in which poor people in books possessed
themselves of money in critical moments of their history.

"Porter, will you please tell me the way to the nearest pawnshop?"

"P-p--!"  Now, indeed, if she had wished to rouse the porter to
animation, she had succeeded beyond her wildest dreams!  He spun round,
and gaped at her with a stupefaction of surprise.  "Pawnshop, did ye
say?  P-awn!  What do _you_ want with a pawnshop, a slip of a girl like
you?"

"That's my business!" returned Darsie loftily.  Since he had been so
unsympathetic and rude, she was certainly not going to satisfy his
curiosity.  Her dear little watch would provide her with money, and
somehow--she didn't understand why--pawnbrokers gave things back after
paying for them, in the most amiable and engaging of fashions.

"That's my business!  If you would kindly direct me--"

"We haven't got no pawnshop," said the porter gruffly.  He stared at her
slowly up and down, down and up, appeared to awake to a suspicious
interest, and opined gruffly, "You'd better go 'ome!"

"Just what I'm trying to do," sighed poor Darsie to herself.  She turned
and went slowly back to her leather seat, and a second disconsolate
review of the situation.  In time to come this experience would rank as
an adventure, and became an oft-told tale.  She would chill her
listeners with hints of The Tramp, evoke shrieks of laughter at her
imitation of the porter.  Darsie realised the fact, but for the moment
it left her cold.  Summer evenings have a trick of turning chill and
damp after the sun is set, and the vault-like waiting-room was dreary
enough to damp the highest spirits.  _How was she going to obtain that
eightpence for a ticket_?

The station clock struck nine; the porter took a turn along the platform
and peered curiously through the dusty window; a luggage train rattled
slowly past, an express whizzed by with thunderous din.  The station
clock struck the quarter, and still the problem was as far as ever from
solution.

"Well," sighed Darsie miserably, "I must just wait.  I'm perished with
cold already.  In two more hours I shall be frozen.  Rheumatic fever, I
suppose, or galloping decline.  It will settle Aunt Maria, that's _one_
good thing! but it's hard all the same, in the flower of my youth!  To
think of all that a human creature can suffer for the sake of a
miserable eightpence!"

She got up stiffly and pressed her face against the pane.  People were
beginning to assemble for the nine-ten.  An old man with a satchel of
tools, two old women with baskets.  "The poor are always generous to the
poor.  Suppose I ask them?  Twopence three farthings each would not kill
them!"  But when one is not used to begging, it is extraordinary how
difficult it is to begin.  Darsie tried to think of the words in which
she would proffer her request, and blushed in discomfort.  No! she
_could_ not.  Of the two disagreeables it really seemed easier to shiver
two hours, and retain one's pride intact, and then, suddenly, the door
of the waiting-room opened with a bang, and Dan's heavy figure stood on
the threshold!  The cry of delight, of breathless incredulity with which
Darsie leaped to her feet, must have been heard to the end of the
platform.  She rushed forward, clutched his arm, and hugged it fast in
the rapture of relief.

"Oh, Dan--you angel--you angel!  Have you dropped down straight from the
skies?"

"Not I!  Nothing so easy.  Scorched along bad roads on a rickety
machine.  Would you be kind enough to let go my arm and stop shrieking!
You'll have the whole village here in a moment.  So _you're_ all right,
I see!  Sitting quietly here, after scaring us half out of our wits--"

"I think _I'm_ the one to be scared!  You were all ready enough to go
on, and leave me stranded by myself.  I've gone through a martyrdom.
Dan! tell me, when did you miss me first?"

Dan gave an expressive grimace.  He looked hot and dusty, and thankful
to sit down on the leather bench.

"Well, it was too much of a scrimmage to think of anything for the first
few miles, but things have a way of printing themselves on one's brain,
and when I _did_ begin to think, there seemed something missing!  I
remembered Vie's face--the colour of a beetroot, and Clemence limping in
the rear.  I remembered John and Russell hauling up Hannah by her arms,
and the two mothers were safely in their carriage--I'd made sure of
that, but--I couldn't remember a thing about _you_!  Then I asked Vie,
and she said you were a long way behind, and I began to guess what had
happened.  At the first stop I did a rush round, and--there you weren't!
So of course I came back."

"But how--how?  There was no train.  Did you cycle?  Where did you get
your machine?"

"Borrowed him from the stationmaster, and left my watch in exchange, in
case I never went back.  Jolly good exchange for him, too.  It's the
worst machine I ever rode, and that's saying a good deal.  I told your
mother I'd bring you back all right, and persuaded her to go home.  What
on earth possessed you to be such a muff?"

Darsie tossed her head, gratitude giving place to wounded pride.

"Muff, indeed!  You don't know what you are talking about, or you
wouldn't be so unkind.  I ran like the rest, but I fell--caught my foot
on something, and fell on my face.  I believe I fainted."  There was an
irrepressible note of pride in her voice as she made this last
statement, for fainting, being unknown in the healthy Garnett family,
was regarded as a most interesting and aristocratic accomplishment.  "I
do believe I fainted, for for several minutes I didn't know where I was.
And I hurt myself, too; look at my hand!"

Dan looked and whistled.

"Skinned it properly, haven't you!  Reminds me of the days of my youth.
Better sponge it clean with your handkerchief and some of that water.
And when you _did_ remember, the train had gone--."

"Yes--and not another until after ten, and not a halfpenny in my pocket
to buy a ticket, and no one but a callous wretch of a porter to consult.
Oh, Dan, I _was_ wretched--I'll bless you all my life for coming back
like this!"

"Rot!" said Dan briskly.  "I was the only man.  Couldn't do anything
else.  I say, you know, it was your doing that I came to this blessed
old picnic at all, and you _have_ let me in for a day!  Eleven to eleven
before we've done with it--twelve solid hours!  I've had about as much
picnic as I want for the rest of my natural life."

"I'm sorry.  I thought it would be so nice.  I'm sorry I bothered you,
Dan."  Darsie was tired and cold, in a condition of physical depression
which made her peculiarly sensitive to a slighting mood.  She leaned her
head against the ugly wall, and shut her lids over her smarting eyes.
Her cheeks were white.  Her lips quivered like a wearied child's, but
she made a charming picture all the same, her inherent picturesqueness
showing itself even in this moment of collapse.

Dan's gaze grew first sympathetic, then thoughtful, as he looked.  In a
dim, abstract way he had been conscious that Darsie Garnett was what he
would have described as "a pretty kid," but the charm of her personality
had never appealed to him until this moment.  Now, as he looked at the
dark eyelashes resting on the white cheek, the droop of the curved red
lips, the long, slim throat that seemed to-night almost too frail to
support the golden head, a feeling of tenderness stirred at his heart.
She was such a tiny scrap of a thing, and she had been tired and
frightened.  What a brute he was to be so gruff and ungracious!  "Buck
up, Darsie!  Only ten minutes more to wait.  I'll get you a cup of
coffee when we arrive.  Your mother said we were to take a cab, so all
the worry's over and nothing but luxury ahead."

But Darsie, quick to note the soothing effect of her prostration,
refused to "buck up," and looked only more worn and pathetic than
before.  The opportunity of lording it over Dan was too precious to be
neglected, so she blinked at him with languid eyes, and said faintly--

"I'll try, but I'm so _very_ tired!  Do you think you could talk to me,
Dan, and amuse me a little bit?  That would pass the time.  Tell me
about yourself, and all you are going to do when you go up to
Cambridge."

And to his own astonishment Dan found himself responding to her request.
His was one of the silent, reserved natures which find it difficult to
speak of the subjects which lie nearest to the heart, but even silent
people have their moments of expansion, and when once Dan had broken the
ice, he found it unexpectedly easy to talk, with Darsie's big eyes fixed
on his in eloquent understanding.  She was a capital little listener;
never interrupted at the wrong moment, indulged in senseless
ejaculations, or fidgety, irritating movement.  Nothing about her moved,
hardly even the blue eyes, so fixed and absorbed was their gaze, while
Dan spoke in low, rapid tones of the course of work which lay ahead, of
the ambitions and dreams which were to crown his efforts.  He must take
first-class honours at Cambridge; nothing less than first-class honours
would do--honours so distinguished that he would have no difficulty in
obtaining a good post as schoolmaster to tide him over the next few
years.  "Teaching's the thing for me--for it leaves four months over for
my own work, the real work of my life--scientific study and research!
That's the only thing worth living for from my point of view, and I
shall plump for that.  I don't care for money, I don't want to marry,
I'd be content to make enough to keep body and soul together, if I could
only help on the cause of humanity.  I am not going up to Cambridge for
two years.  I can do better grinding quietly at home, and the governor
doesn't mind.  In fact, he is just as well pleased to think I shall have
more time to run when Hannah goes up to Newnham."

Darsie drew her breath sharply.

"Oh, Dan! how fortunate you are--how fortunate Hannah is, to be able to
do as you like!  I would give my ears to go up to Newnham, too, but
father says it's impossible.  He can't afford it with the boys'
education getting more expensive every year.  I shall have to stay at
home, and turn into a miserable morning governess, teaching wretched
little kids to read, and taking them for a walk round the park.  Oh, oh!
it makes me _ill_ to think about it."

Dan laughed shortly.

"Excuse me! it makes you well.  You look quite like yourself again.
I'll give you a bit of advice if you like: don't believe that anything's
impossible in this world, because it isn't!  Put the nursery governess
idea out of your mind, and fire ahead for Newnham.  There's always the
chance of a scholarship, and even if that didn't come off, who can tell
what may happen in three years' time?  The way may clear in a dozen
ways; it probably _will_ clear, if you get ready yourself.  There are
precious few things one can't gain by steady slogging ahead."

Darsie looked at him with a kindling glance, her lips set, a spot of red
showed on either cheek.

"Right!" she said briefly, and at that moment the train steamed into the
station and the conference was at an end.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

AUNT MARIA'S CHOICE.

Aunt Maria arrived on Tuesday night, bringing "my woman" in attendance.
She was more like a parrot than ever, for her face had grown narrower,
her nose bigger, and the roundness of her eyes was accentuated by gold-
rimmed spectacles.  When a richly coloured Paisley shawl was drawn
tightly over her sloping shoulders the resemblance was positively
startling to behold, and the terrors of an eight-weeks visit loomed
larger than ever before the minds of the Garnett sisters.

The extraordinary thing was that Aunt Maria seemed to take no notice of
the girls, whom, as everybody was aware, she had come to inspect.  She
talked to father, she talked to mother, she cross-questioned the boys as
to their progress at school and expressed regret that they had not done
better; she displayed an intelligent interest in the neighbours, the
servants, and the new dining-room rug, but for the three daughters of
the house she had not a word, hardly, it was believed, a glance.

In the presence of such utter indifference it was impossible to keep up
the various roles which each girl had privately practised with the view
of concealing her charms and diverting Aunt Maria's attention from
herself.  Clemence had decided that rounded shoulders and a lurching
gait were defects which at seventeen threatened a painful permanence,
and had therefore lurched persistently throughout the first evening,
since which time she had slowly but steadily recovered her natural gait.

After long practice before the mirror Darsie had decided that an open
mouth and falling under-jaw could work marvels in the way of stupidity
of expression, and had nerved herself to sit agape for the period of
forty-eight hours.  Lavender had decided to sulk.  "Every one hates
sulks!  It would be better to live alone on a desert island than with a
person who sulks.  I'll sulk, and she won't be paid to have me!"  So one
sister had sulked and the other gaped the whole of that first long
evening, and then, becoming increasingly freed from their fears, began
to smile secretly across the table, to nod and to nudge, to telegraph
messages in the silent but eloquent fashions to which members of a large
family resort when visitors are present and talking is not allowed.  And
Aunt Maria munched her food, and wrapped the Paisley shawl more closely
round her shoulders, and cast not a glance to right or left!  A blissful
possibility was broached that she had changed her mind, and did not
desire a visitor after all.

Wednesday and Thursday passed in increasing calm, but on Friday morning
certain alarming symptoms became visible.  Mrs Garnett came to
breakfast with unmistakable signs of agitation upon her face.  Mr
Garnett was silent and distrait, hid behind his newspaper, and answered
at random the remarks of his family.  Late arrivals were allowed to pass
without reproach, and Tim's raids upon the marmalade received no further
protest than a flickering smile.

The die was cast!  The girls knew it without a word; in a stupor of
misery they sat, ears cocked, hearts in their boots, waiting for a sign
which should betray the truth, and decide once for all the identity of
the victim.

It came at last, towards the end of the meal, in the midst of a ghastly
silence.

"Darsie, darling," said Mrs Garnett fondly, "won't you have some more
coffee?"

"_Darling_!"  Never were Mrs Garnett's north-country lips known to use
that term except under stress of the most poignant emotion.  To be
"darling" one was compelled to be very ill, very sad, angelically
repentant, or in an extremity of fear, and Darsie, who this morning was
not afflicted in any one of these three ways, realised in a flash the
awful significance of the term.  She sat white and silent, too dazed for
speech, and to do them justice Clemence and Lavender looked almost as
perturbed as herself, relief on their own account being eclipsed for the
moment by a realisation of the loss which the holiday party was about to
sustain.  With a sudden and uninvited humility each sister mentally
acknowledged that for the general good of the family it would have been
better had the choice fallen upon herself!

Darsie braced her feet against a leg of the table, and struggled with a
lump in her throat.  Coffee? she never wanted to drink any more coffee
so long as she lived!  The sight, the smell of it would be for ever
associated with this ghastly moment.  She turned big, woeful eyes on her
mother's face and stammered a breathless inquiry:

"Mother, you have something to say!  Please say it.  Don't break it to
me, please; it's worse to wait.  Say it bang out!"

"Oh, Darsie, darling; yes, darling, it _is_ as you suppose!  Aunt Maria
has chosen you.  She wants you to start with her on Saturday morning,
but if it's too soon--if you would rather stay over Sunday, I will
arrange..."

Darsie bit her lips in the desperate resolve not to cry, but to carry
off the situation with a high air.

"If I'm to go at all, I'd rather go at once, and get it over.  There's
nothing to be gained by delay.  `Better to die by sudden shock than
perish piecemeal on the rock.'"

"But you will want to say goodbye to your friends, dear; you will have
little arrangements to make..."  Mrs Garnett was all nervousness and
anxiety to appease, but after the manner of victims Darsie felt a
perverse satisfaction in rejecting overtures, even when by so doing she
doubly punished herself.

"I don't mean to say goodbye.  I don't wish to see any one before I go.
I hate scenes."

"Well, well! just as you please, dear.  After all, it is for a very
short time.  Eight weeks will soon pass."

Silence.  Every youthful face at the table was set in an eloquent
declaration that eight weeks was an eternity, a waste, a desert of
space.  Mr Garnett put down his newspaper and hurriedly left the room.
He had the usual male horror of scenes, and, moreover, Darsie was his
special pet, and his own nerves were on edge at the thought of the
coming separation.  If the child cried or appealed to him for
protection, he would not like to say what he might do.  Flight appeared
to be his safest course, but Darsie felt a pang of disappointment and
wounded love at this desertion of her cause, and the smart did not help
to improve her temper.

"Aunt Maria wishes to see you, dear, as soon as you have finished your
breakfast," continued Mrs Garnett, elaborately conciliatory.  "Father
and I are very grateful to her for her interest in you, but you know,
dear, how we feel about losing you, how we sympathise with your
disappointment!  We are convinced that in the end this chance will be
for your benefit; but in the meantime it is very hard.  We are sorry for
you, dear."

"And I," declared Darsie coldly, "am sorry for Aunt Maria!"

She pushed back her chair and stalked out of the room, while her
brothers and sisters stared after her agape.  Along the narrow oil-
clothed hall she went, up the steep, narrow staircase to the little
third-floor bedroom, the only place on earth which was her very own.
There was nothing luxurious about it, nothing of any intrinsic value or
beauty, but in the eyes of its occupant every separate article was a
pearl of price.  All her treasures were here--her pictures, her
ornaments, her books, mementoes of journeyings, offerings of friends.
It was a shrine, a refuge from the cold outer world.  Alone in "my room"
one lost the insignificance of a member of a large family, and became a
responsible human being face to face with personal trials and
responsibilities...

Eight weeks out of a life!  To the adult mind a sacrifice of so short a
period may be a disappointment, but can hardly be deemed a trial; to
schoolgirl fifteen it may seem a catastrophe which clouds the whole
horizon.  To Darsie Garnett the change of plan was the first real sorrow
of her life, and these moments of reflection were full of a suffocating
misery.  Anticipated joys rose before her with intolerable distinctness.
She saw her companions happily at play, and felt a stabbing dart of
jealousy.  Yes, they would forget all about her and feel no loss from
her absence!  Clemence and Vie would enjoy their _tete-a-tete_, would be
unwilling to admit a third into their conferences at her return.  Dan
would take them for boating and fishing expeditions.  Dan would grow to
like Clemence better than herself!  Darsie gave a little sob of misery
at the thought.  She had no sentimental feelings as regards Dan, or any
one else at this period of her life, but as the one _big_ boy, almost
man, of her acquaintance Dan stood on a pedestal by himself as a lofty
and superior being, whose favour was one of the prizes of life.  That
Dan should become more intimate, more friendly with Clemence and
Lavender than with herself was a possibility fraught with dismay.

Darsie sobbed again, but her eyes were dry; she was angry, too angry to
cry; her heart was seething with rebellion.  Some one knocked at the
door and received no answer, knocked again and was curtly ordered to "go
away"; then Mr Garnett's voice spoke, in gentle and conciliatory
tones--

"It's father!  Let me in, dear; I've just a minute..."

It was impossible to refuse such a request.  Darsie opened the door, and
there he stood, tall and thin, with the embarrassed _boy_ look upon his
face which always made him seem especially near to his children.  It was
the look he wore when they were in trouble and he essayed to lecture and
advise, and it seemed to say, "I've been there myself; I understand!
Now it's my part to play the heavy father, but _I'm not nearly so much
shocked as I pretend_!"  To-day his manner was frankly commiserating.

"Well, Kiddie, dear!  I was running off to town like a coward, but at
the last moment I was obliged to come up for a word.  It's hard lines
for you, dear, and I want you to know that it's hard lines for me, too!
The country won't be half so jolly as if we'd all been together.  I'll
miss you _badly_, little lass!"

"_Don't_!  I'll howl.  _Don't_ make me howl!" pleaded Darsie hastily,
the tight feeling about her eyes and lips giving place to an alarming
weepiness at the sound of the tender words.  "If you really care,
father, couldn't you--couldn't you possibly refuse?"

Mr Garnett shook his head.

"No!  That's settled.  We talked it over, mother and I, and agreed that
it must be done.  It's a duty, dear, and we can't shelve duties in this
life.  I'm sorry for you in your disappointment, and only wish I could
help, but in this matter no one can help but yourself.  You can do a lot
if you try.  Shall I tell you, Darsie, how you could get over your
regret, and turn your visit to Arden into something far more agreeable
than you can now imagine?"

Darsie cocked an eye at him, suspicious and hesitating.  He was going to
preach!  She knew the symptoms of old, and by way of counter-action put
on her most dour and sullen expression.

"Um!"

"Very well, then, here it is!  Turn your back on the might-have-been,
and try with all your might to like what _is_!  Aunt Maria will, I know,
be all that is kind and indulgent--in her own way!  It won't be _your_
way, however, and that's the rub.  If you begin your visit in a spirit
of irritation, I'm afraid you are going to have a pretty poor time, but
if you try to enjoy every little thing that comes along out of which
enjoyment can be squeezed and to _laugh_ at the rest, to laugh instead
of to cry--well, it's astonishing how the scene will change!  Do you
think you could try?"

Darsie pouted, sulky and unconvinced.  "Were _you_ resigned when you
were fifteen?"

"No, my lassie!  I wasn't, indeed.  Very far from it, I'm sorry to say.
But when one has travelled on for many years and come many a cropper on
the way one _does_ long to show one's children the short cuts!  That's
_one_ short cut.  Darsie; I wish you'd take it, and avoid the falls.  If
you can't have what you like, try to like what you have.  Expect good,
not evil.  Say to yourself every morning: `This is going to be a good
day, a happy day, one of the happiest days of my life,' and then you are
half-way towards making it so.  Poor little Kiddie! it sounds hard, but
try it--try it--and occasionally, just for a change, forget that you are
Darsie Garnett for five minutes or so at a time, and pretend instead
that you are Maria Hayes!  Pretend that you are old and lonely and
ailing in health, and that there's a young girl staying with you from
whom you are hoping to enjoy some brightness and variety!  Eh?  The
other morning in church you were beside me when we were singing `Fight
the good fight!'  You sang it heartily, Darsie; I enjoyed your
singing.--I thought you looked as if you really meant the words.  Well,
here's the battlefield for you, dear!  Are you going to play coward?  I
don't believe it.  I think better of my girl!"

He laid his hand on her shoulder with a caressing touch.  Darsie
wriggled and screwed up her little nose in eloquent grimace, but when
the hand crept up to her chin she lifted her face for the farewell kiss,
and even volunteered an extra one on her own account on the dear, thin
cheek.

Mr Garnett smiled contentedly to himself as he descended the staircase.
Darsie had made no promises, but he was satisfied that his words had
not been in vain.  And Darsie, left alone in her room, fell
instinctively to repeating the words of the grand old hymn--

  "Run the straight race through God's good grace,
  Lift up thine eyes, and seek His Face..."

A little sob punctuated the lines.  To the blind eyes of earth the
straight race appeared so very very crooked!



CHAPTER EIGHT.

FIRST DAYS.

Darsie left home on the following Thursday, and in company with Aunt
Maria and "my woman" took train for Arden, in Buckinghamshire.  The
journey was a nightmare, for Lady Hayes disliked travelling, and was in
a condition of nervousness, which made her acutely susceptible to the
doings of her companions.  Within an hour of starting Darsie had been
admonished not to sit facing the engine because of the draught, not to
look out of the window in case she got a cinder in her eye, not to read
in case she strained her eyes, not to rub her fingers on the pane, not
to cross her knees because it was unladylike, not to shout, not to
mumble, not to say "What?" not to yawn without putting her finger over
her mouth, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

Being called to account so frequently was an exhausting process, and
Darsie felt a thrill of joy at the announcement of lunch.  A meal in a
train would be a novel and exciting experience which would go far
towards making up for the dullness of the preceding hour, but alas!
Aunt Maria refused with scorn to partake of food, cooked goodness knew
how, by goodness knew whom, and had supplied herself with a few Plasmon
biscuits, the which she handed round with the information that they
contained more nourishment than ounces of beefsteak.  They were very
dull and very dry, however, and Darsie managed to get a crumb down the
wrong way, and coughed continuously for the next hour in a tickling,
aggravating manner, while Aunt Maria reiterated, "Really, my dear!
_Most_ unpleasant!" and seemed to consider herself personally aggrieved.

When Arden was reached the position improved, for stationmaster and
porters alike flew to hover round the great lady of the neighbourhood,
and Darsie sunned herself in the novel consciousness of importance.
Outside the station a cart was waiting for luggage, and a large, old-
fashioned barouche with two fat brown horses, and with two brown-
liveried servants upon the box.  The village children bobbed curtsies as
the carriage bowled through the village street, and Darsie smiled
benignly and bent her yellow head in gracious acknowledgment.  As niece
and guest of the Lady of the Towers, these greetings were surely partly
intended for herself.  She felt an exhilarating glow of complacence, and
determined to describe the scene to Vie Vernon on the earliest possible
opportunity.

The Towers was a large, very ugly, stucco house, surrounded by a
beautiful rolling park.  Inside, the rooms were huge and square, and one
and all characterised by a depressing pitch of orderliness, which made
it almost impossible to believe that they could be used as ordinary
human habitations!

Darsie was escorted to a bedroom with ponderous mahogany furniture, so
complete a contrast from her own shabby, cheery little den that the
sight of it added the final touch to her depression.  She refreshed
herself by a long splash in hot water, brushed out her tangled mane, put
on her Sunday dress, and descended in state to partake of dinner, which
was served an hour earlier than usual in consideration of the
travellers' hunger and fatigue.

Despite her weariness and nervous exhaustion, Lady Hayes had made what
appeared to Darsie's unsophisticated eyes a magnificent toilette for the
meal, and she eyed the Sunday frock with a criticism which was anything
but approving.  "But it's the best I've got, except the party one, and I
can't wear that for one old lady," said Darsie to herself as she
followed meekly behind the _moire antique_ train, and seated herself at
the end of the dining-table.  Two men-servants stood at attention--two!
one for each diner, solemn, immovable-looking creatures who seemed to
move on wheels and who kept their eyes glued upon every mouthful you
ate, ready to pounce upon your plate and nip it swiftly and noiselessly
away.  They were stricken with dumbness also, if you were to trust the
evidence of your senses, but had certainly ears, and could drink in
every word you said.

For the rest, it might be soothing to one's pride to live in a big
country house, but it was certainly abnormally dull.  The day's
programme never varied by a hair's breadth, and Aunt Maria, though kind,
possessed the failing of all others most trying to the youthful mind.
_She fussed_!  She fussed about clothes, she fussed about food, she
fussed about draughts, she fussed about manners, deportment, speech, the
way you sat down, the way you got up, the way you laughed, yawned,
sneezed, crossed the room, and did your hair.  From morning to night,
"My dear, _don't_!" or "My dear, _do_!" rang in Darsie's ears, till she
was almost beside herself with irritation.

Honestly and laboriously she tried to practise her father's advice: to
put the thought of the seaside party aside, make the most of the good
points of her own position, and "fight the good fight," but the effort
seemed to exhaust her physically, as well as mentally, until by the end
of the day she looked white and drooping, pathetically unlike her
natural glowing self.  Aunt Maria noticed the change, and fussed about
that, too, but with an underlying tenderness that was upsetting to the
girl's strained nerves.

"You look very tired to-night, my dear!  Are you not well?  Is there
anything the matter?"

"Quite well, thank you.  Only--lonely!" replied Darsie, with a plaintive
accent on that last word which brought Lady Hayes's glance upon her in
quick inquiry--

"Lonely!  But, my dear, you haven't been a minute alone all day long."

"No," agreed Darsie meekly, and said no more, but the little
monosyllable was more eloquent than any disclaimer.  Lady Hayes flushed,
and knitted her brows in thought.

"I must ask some young people to meet you.  I have some nice young
friends living about a mile away.  They are visiting at present, but
will soon be home.  I will write.  Naturally you miss the young
society."

She was so kind, so considerate, that it seemed mean to feel bored and
impatient; but, oh dear, how long the days _did_ seem, how dull and
monotonous the morning drive, the afternoon needlework, the evening game
of patience or bezique.

The climax came one rainy afternoon when the ordinary two-hours drive
could not take place, and the hostess and her young guest had spent most
of the day together in the library.  Now it is trying for an old lady as
well as for a young one to be deprived of the usual exercise, and if
Darsie's impatience and rebelliousness of spirit were more acute than
usual, Lady Hayes was also more nervous and exacting.  In this instance
the weight of the old lady's displeasure seemed to fall upon Darsie's
unfortunate coiffure.  Whatever turn the conversation might take, it
returned with relentless certainty to "Your hair, my dear!  When _I_ was
young, young girls wore their hair neatly braided.  I intensely dislike
all this purring and elaboration.  You would look a different girl if
you brushed it smoothly."

"I should," agreed Darsie coolly.  "I should look a sight.  _My_
pompadour is the best pompadour in my class.  The girls all say so.
They ask me how I do it.  I've taught lots of them to do their own."

"I'm sorry to hear it.  Time enough when you come out to wear
`pompadours,' as you call them.  And your bow!  Ridiculous size!  If it
were neat and small--"

"They wear them twice as big in America.  And in France.  Sash ribbons!
I would, too, if I could afford.  It's the fashion, Aunt Maria.  Every
one wears them big."

"Surely that is all the more reason why a sensible girl should set a
good example by being neat and moderate herself!  I don't approve of
hair being allowed to grow long at your age, but if it _is_ long, it
ought certainly to be kept in bounds.  Yours is hanging all over your
shoulders at this moment.  Most untidy!  I am speaking for your own
good."

There was a moment's chilly silence, then Darsie asked in a tone of
extraordinary politeness--

"Just exactly _how_ would you do my hair, Aunt Maria, if you were in my
place to-day?"

Lady Hayes straightened herself briskly.  "I should _brush_ it," she
said emphatically.  "It is naturally curly, no doubt, but I cannot
believe that a good brushing would not reduce it to order!  I should
damp it and brush it well, and then tie it back so that it would not
hang loose over your shoulders like a mane.  It would be pleasant to see
what a difference it would make.  A neat head is one of the things which
every young gentlewoman should strive to possess."

Darsie folded her needlework, put it neatly away in her bag, and, rising
from her seat, marched slowly from the room.  It was nearing the hour
for tea, when she usually went upstairs to wash and tidy-up generally,
so that there was nothing unusual in her departure; it was only when she
was safe inside her room that the extraordinary nature of to-day's
preparations was revealed.

She took off the lace collar and pretty bead necklace which gave an air
of lightness to her plain dark dress, wrapped a dressing-jacket round
her shoulders, and dipped her head deep into a basin of water.  Then
with a comb the _wet_ hair was parted accurately in the centre, and
brushed to the ears till it had the air of being painted rather than
real, so smooth and plastered was the effect.  The ends, plaited with
merciless tightness, were looped together with a fragment of a broken
shoelace, so tightly that from the front no sign of their presence could
be suspected.  When all was finished and the dressing-jacket thrown
aside the effect was positively startling to behold.  It did not seem
possible to believe that this prim, demure damsel could be the same
brilliant-looking creature who had entered the room but ten minutes
before, and Darsie herself was half-shocked, half-triumphant at the
completeness of the transformation.

"'Spose I had a fever and lost my hair!  How simply awful!" she said to
herself in terror.  "If they could see me at home, they'd never call me
pretty again.  I think even Aunt Maria will jump!"

She skipped with delight at the possibility, and the gesture seemed so
singularly out of keeping with her appearance that she laughed again,
restored to good temper by the delightful experience of taking part in a
prank once more.

Ten minutes later, accurately at the moment when the tea equipage would
be in course of arrangement in the drawing-room, Darsie composed her
face into a "prunes and prism" decorum, and slipped noiselessly into the
room.

To a certain extent all was as she had expected.  Mason stood
majestically over the tea-table; James, his satellite, approached with a
tray of cakes and sandwiches; Aunt Maria sat waiting in her high-backed
chair--so far all was just as she had planned; what she was all
unprepared for, however, was the presence of three youthful visitors,
two girls and a youth, who sat facing the door, staring at her in
stunned dismay.

The Percivals!  By all that was ill-timed and embarrassing, the
Percivals themselves, returned from their visit, choosing a wet
afternoon to drive over and pay their respects to Lady Hayes's young
guest!  Sheer horror of the situation took away Darsie's breath; she
stood stock still in the middle of the floor, felt her lips gape apart,
the crimson rush to her face, saw in a mental flash a vision of the
country bumpkin she must appear--just for a moment, then Aunt Maria's
voice said, in even, equable tones--

"Ah, here she is!  Darsie, these are my young friends of whom I have
spoken.  I am pleased that you should become acquainted.  My niece,
Darsie Garnett.  Noreen, Ida, and Ralph Percival...  Now we will have
tea!"

The voice, the manner, were absolutely normal.  Was it possible that she
had not _seen_?  Darsie shot a quick glance at the old lady's face, met
an unconcerned smile, and for the first time in the history of their
acquaintance felt a thrill of admiration.  Splendid to have such self-
control, to show _no_ sign of surprise or irritation!  She shook hands
awkwardly with the three visitors, and sat down on the nearest chair.

"So awfully pleased to meet you!" cried Noreen gushingly.  She was a
smart-looking girl of sixteen, with brown eyes and a deeply dimpled
chin.  Darsie knew exactly what she was thinking--understood that the
gushing manner had been adopted to disguise dismayed disappointment in
the aspect of a possible companion.  Ralph was quite old--eighteen at
least, with well-cut features, thin lips, and small grey eyes, a dandy
wearing a fancy waistcoat and resplendent white spats.  His whole aspect
breathed a loud, "I told you so!  You _would_ drag me with you.  _Told_
you how it would be.  Lady Hayes's grand-niece!  What could you expect?"
Ida was bubbling over with curiosity.  What a fine story she would have
to tell to the family party on her return!

Conversation would have dragged pitifully if it had not been for Aunt
Maria's efforts, for the visitors seemed smitten with dumbness, and
beneath the fire of their glances Darsie's embarrassment increased
rather than diminished.  She had no spirit left; a succession of
monosyllables and an occasional "Oh, really!" made up the sum of her
contributions to the conversation.  It must have been a strong sense of
duty which nerved Noreen Percival to offer the invitation which
presumably was the object of her visit.

"We want to know if you will come to lunch with us on Thursday, and stay
for the afternoon?  If it's fine, we can have some tennis.  We will
drive you back after tea."

Darsie hesitated, but apparently the decision was not to be left to her.
Aunt Maria accepted with a gracious acknowledgment of Mrs Percival's
kindness, and in answer to a scowl from Ralph his sisters rose and made
a hasty adieu.

"We came in the governess cart.  The pony gets restless--mustn't keep
him waiting.  Thank you _so_ much!  Goodbye!"

They were gone; the outer door was shut behind them.  Darsie, standing
by the tea-table, caught a glimpse of her own reflection in a mirror at
the opposite end of the room, a stiff, Dutch-doll of a figure, with
plastered hair, crimson cheeks, and plain frock.  She glanced at Aunt
Maria reseating herself in her high-backed chair, and taking up the
inevitable knitting.  Now for it! now for the lecture!  Well, after all,
she had only done what had been suggested, a trifle _more_ perhaps
than had been suggested, but that was erring on the right side, not the
wrong.  Besides, if a naughty impulse to annoy and humiliate Aunt Maria
had really existed, in the end she had been a thousand times more
humiliated herself.  And now, if you please, she was to be scolded and
lectured into the bargain!

But Aunt Maria neither lectured nor scolded.  All through that next hour
when pride kept Darsie chained to her place, the older lady talked in
her most natural manner, and even smiled at her companion across the
patience-board without a flicker of expression to betray that the figure
confronting her was in any way different from the one which she was
accustomed to see.

Once more admiration vanquished irritation, and Darsie roused herself to
join in the problem of "building," and ended in actually feeling a
dawning of interest in what had hitherto appeared the dreariest of
problems.  When seven o'clock struck, and the old lady closed the board,
and said, in her natural, every-day voice, "And now we must dress for
dinner!"  Darsie walked slowly across the room, hesitated, and finally
retraced her steps and knelt down on a footstool by Lady Hayes' side.

"Aunt Maria--_please_!  I should like to thank you!"

"Thank me, my dear.  For what?"

"For--for saying nothing!  For not crowing over me as you might have
done!"

The flushed, upturned face was very sweet--all the sweeter perhaps for
the plastered hair, which gave to it so quaint and old-world an air.
Lady Hayes laid a wrinkled hand on the girl's shoulder; her eyes
twinkled humorously through her spectacles.

"No, I won't crow, my dear!  That would be ungenerous.  Circumstances
have been pretty hard on you already.  This--this little exhibition was
not intended for an audience, but for my own private edification.  It
was unfortunate that the Percivals should have chosen such a moment for
their first call.  I was sorry for your discomfiture."

"You oughtn't to have been!  I _meant_ to be naughty.  Oh, you've
scored--scored all the way.  I apologise in dust and ashes, but please--
if you will be very noble--_never_ speak of it again!"

She reached the door once more, was about to make a bolt for the
staircase, when Lady Hayes's voice called to her to return--

"Darsie?"

"Yes!"

"Come here, child!"

The thin hand was held out to meet hers, the kind old eyes looked
wonderfully soft and tender.

"I think it is only fair to tell you that ... in your own language, you
have scored also! ...  Oblige me by doing your hair in your ordinary
fashion for the future!"

"Oh, Aunt Maria, you _duck_!" cried Darsie, and for the first time in
her life flung her arms voluntarily around the old lady's neck and gave
her a sounding kiss.



CHAPTER NINE.

THE PERCIVALS.

It was really rather fun dressing for the visit to the Percivals on
Thursday; trying to make oneself look one's _very_ best, and imagining
their surprise at the transformation!  Aunt Maria, too, seemed quite to
enter into the spirit of the thing, inquired anxiously _which_ dress,
and gave special instructions that it should be ironed afresh, so that
it might appear at its freshest and best.

"My woman" had evidently been instructed to take the young guest's
wardrobe under her care, since new ribbons and frilling now appeared
with engaging frequency, giving quite an air to half-worn garments.
Darsie in a blue muslin dress, with a white straw hat wreathed with
daisies, and her golden locks floating past her waist, made a charming
picture of youth and happiness as she sat in the old barouche, and when
the hall was reached Aunt Maria cast a keen glance around the grounds,
transparently eager to discover the young people and share in the fun of
the meeting.

Ralph was nowhere to be seen, that was _not_ to be wondered at under the
circumstances, but the two girls were on duty on the tennis-lawn in
front of the house, ready to come forward and welcome their guest
immediately upon her arrival.

The blank gapes of bewilderment with which they witnessed the alighting
of the radiant blue and gold apparition afforded keen delight both to
aunt and niece.  They were literally incapable of speech, and even after
Aunt Maria had driven away, coughing in the most suspicious manner
behind a raised hand, even then conversation was of the most jerky and
spasmodic kind.  It was amusing enough for a time, but for a whole
afternoon it would certainly pall, and Darsie _did_ want to enjoy
herself when she had a chance.  She decided that it was time to put
matters on a right footing, and looked smilingly to right and left, at
her embarrassed, tongue-tied companions.

"I think," said Darsie politely, "that I owe you an explanation!"

She explained, and Noreen and Ida pealed with laughter, and danced up
and down on the gravel path, and slid their hands through her arm,
vowing undying friendship on the spot.

"How per-fectly killing!  I do _love_ a girl who is up to pranks.
_What_ a prank!  How you _must_ have felt when you saw us sitting there!
And Lady Hayes--what _did_ she say?  Was she per-fectly furious?"

"Aunt Maria behaved like an angel, a dignified angel!  I never liked her
so much.  How did _you_ feel?  Tell me just exactly your sentiments when
you saw me walking into that room?"

"I certainly did feel upset, because we _had_ to ask you!  Mother said
we must, and we asked each other what on _earth_ should we do with you
all day long.  Ida did say that your eyes were pretty.  She was the only
one who stuck up for you at all!  I thought you looked too appalling for
words."

"What did your brother say?" asked Darsie with natural feminine
curiosity, whereupon Noreen answered with unabashed candour--

"He said you were `a rummy little frump,' and that he would take very
good care to have an engagement for to-day as many miles as possible
away from home!"

"Did he, indeed!"  The colour rose in Darsie's cheeks.  "Well, I'm very
glad he did.  I like girls best, and I thought _he_ looked conceited and
proud.  My best friend has a big brother, too, but he's not a bit like
yours.  Rather shaggy, but _so_ clever and kind!  He promised to write
to me while I was here, just because he knew I should be dull.  It's
really an honour, you know, for he is terrifically clever.  Every one
says he will be Prime Minister one day.  He's going to Cambridge.  Your
brother is, too, isn't he?  I shouldn't think they would be at _all_ in
the same set!"

The Percival girls looked at each other and smiled.

"Poor old Ralph!  Isn't she blighting?  You don't know anything about
him, you know.  It's only because he called you a frump, but never mind,
he has to be back to tea to look after some work for father, and then
he'll see!  If you are going to be friends with us, you mustn't begin by
disliking our brother.  He may be conceited, but he is certainly not
`shaggy,' and he is much nicer to his sisters than most big boys.  He
thinks we are really nicer than other girls."

Darsie regarded them critically.

"Well, I think you are!" she conceded graciously.  "Oh, how thankful I
am that there is some one _young_ in the neighbourhood.  I was beginning
to feel so painfully middle-aged.  Let's sit down and talk.  Tell me
about yourselves.  Do you go to school?  Which school?  Do you go in for
exams?  What subjects do you like best?"

Noreen laughed, and shook her head.

"We have a governess.  We are going for a year to a finishing school in
Paris, but mother doesn't approve of exams, for girls.  She wants us to
be able to play, and sing, and draw, and speak German and French, and
she says that's enough.  We don't bother about Latin or mathematics or
any of those dull old things."

"They are not dull.  They're glorious.  I revel in them.  But you're
rich, of course, and won't have to work.  I shall have to earn money
myself, so I want to pass all the exams.  I can."

The Percivals stared in solemn surprise.  The idea was so strange it
took some time to digest.  All their friends were well off like
themselves; really, when they came to think of it, they had never met a
prospective _working_ girl before!  They regarded Darsie with a
curiosity tinged with compassion.

"Do you mean it--really?  Tell us about yourself?  Where do you live?"

"In Birchester, Craven Street, Sandon terrace--the corner house in
Sandon Terrace."

"Craven Street.  Really!"  The girls were plainly shocked, but Ida
rallied bravely, and said in her most courteous air: "It must be so
_interesting_ to live in a street!  So much to see.  And have you _very_
interesting people living across the road?"

"No.  Rather dull.  Husbands and wives, and one old bachelor with a
leg--lame leg, I mean.  No one at all thrilling, but our friends--our
_best_ friends--live in a terrace at right angles with ours.  We have
great times with them.  I'll tell you about our latest craze."

Noreen and Ida sat breathlessly listening to the history of the
telegraph, till it was time to go into the house for lunch, when Darsie
was introduced to Mrs Percival, a very smartly dressed lady, who looked
astonishingly young to be the mother of a grown-up family.  After lunch
the three girls attempted tennis, but gave it up in deference to the
visitor's lack of skill, visited stables and kennels and conservatory,
and were again brought face to face with the different points of view
existing between the town and the country dweller.

"Do all people who live in the country go and stare at their horses and
dogs every day of their lives?" demanded Darsie with an air of patient
resignation, as Noreen and Ida patted, and whistled, and rubbed the
noses of their four-footed friends, fed them with dainty morsels, and
pointed out good points in technical terms which were as Greek in the
listener's ears.  "Aunt Maria goes every single day; it's a part of the
regular programme, like knitting in the afternoon and Patience at night.
I get--_so_ bored!"

The shocked looks which the Percival sisters turned upon her seemed
ludicrously out of proportion with the circumstances.

"Don't you--don't you _love_ animals?"

"Certainly--in their place.  But I _cannot_ see the interest in staring
in through a stable door at the same horses standing munching in the
same stalls day after day.  It's no use pretending that I can," declared
Darsie obstinately.  "And the dogs make such a noise, and drag at your
clothes.  I'm always thankful to get away.  Let's go back to the garden
and look at the flowers.  I could stare at flowers for ages.  It seems
too glorious to be true to be able to pick as many roses as you like.
At home mother buys a sixpenny bunch on Saturday, and cuts the stalks
every day, and puts them into fresh water to make them last as long as
possible, and we have nasturtiums for the rest of the week.  I love the
fruit and vegetable garden, too.  It's so amusing to see how things
grow!  Especially,"--she laughed mischievously, showing a whole nest of
baby dimples in one pink cheek, "I warn you frankly that this is a
hint!--especially things you can _eat_!"

Noreen and Ida chuckled sympathetically.

"Come along!  There is still a bed of late strawberries.  We'll take
camp-stools from the summer-house, and you shall sit and feast until you
are tired, and we'll sit and watch you, and talk.  We seem to have had
strawberries at every meal for weeks past, and are quite tired of the
sight, so you can have undisturbed possession."

"And I," said Darsie with a sigh, "have never in my life had enough!  It
will be quite an epoch to go on eating until I _want_ to stop.  That's
the worst of a large family, the dainties divide into such tiny shares!"

Ten minutes later the three girls had taken up their position in the
kitchen garden in a spot which to the town-bred girl seemed ideal for
comfort and beauty.  The strawberry-bed ran along the base of an old
brick wall on which the branches of peach-trees stretched out in the
formal upward curves of great candelabra.  An old apple-tree curved
obligingly over the gravel path to form a protection from the sun, and
it was the prettiest thing in the world to glance up through the
branches with their clusters of tiny green apples, and see the patches
of blue sky ahead.  Darsie sat stretching out her hand to pluck one big
strawberry after another, an expression of beatific contentment on her
face.

"Yes--it's scrumptious to live in the country--in summer!  If it were
always like this I'd want to stay for ever, but it must be dreadfully
dull in winter, when everything is dead and still.  I shouldn't like it
a bit."

"No!  No!" the Percival girls protested in chorus.  "It's beautiful
always, and livelier than ever, for there's the hunting.  Hunting is
just _the_ most delightful sport!  We hunt once a week always, and often
twice--the most exciting runs.  We are sorry, absolutely sorry when
spring comes to stop us."

"Oh, do you hunt!"  Darsie was quite quelled by the thought of such
splendour.  In town it was rare even to see a girl on horseback; a hunt
was a thing which you read about, but never expected to behold with your
own eyes.  The knowledge that her new friends actually participated in
this lordly sport raised them to a pinnacle of importance.  She munched
strawberries in thoughtful silence for several moments before recovering
enough spirit to enter another plea in favour of town.

"Well, anyway--if you _don't_ hunt, it must be dull.  _And_ lonely!
Aren't you scared to death walking along dark lanes without a single
lamppost?  I should live in terror of tramps and burglars, and never
dare to stir out of the house after three o'clock."

"No you wouldn't, if you were accustomed to it.  Our maids come home
quite happily at ten o'clock at night, but if they go to a city they are
nervous in the brightly lit streets.  That's curious, but it's true.  We
used to leave doors and windows open all day long, and hardly trouble to
lock up at night, until a few months ago when we had a scare which made
us more careful.  Till then we trusted every one, and every one trusted
us."

"A scare!"  Darsie pricked her ears, scenting an excitement.  "What
scare?  Do tell me!  I love gruesome stories.  What was it?  Thieves?"

Noreen nodded solemnly.

"Yes!  It's gruesome enough.  Simply horrid for us, for so many other
people lost their--but I'll tell you from the beginning.  It was the
night of the Hunt Ball at Rakeham, and the house was crammed with
visitors.  We were allowed to sit up to see them all start.  They looked
so lovely--the men in their pink coats, and the ladies in their very
best dresses and jewels.  Well, it was about half-past seven; the ladies
had gone upstairs to dress about half an hour before, when suddenly
there was a great noise and clamour, and some one shouted `Fire!' and
pealed an alarm on the gong.  No one knew where it was, but you never
heard such a hubbub and excitement.  Doors opened all down the
corridors, and the ladies rushed out in dressing-gowns and dressing-
jackets, with hair half done, or streaming down their backs, shrieking
and questioning, and clinging to one another, and rushing downstairs.
The men were more sensible; they took it quite calmly, and just set to
work to put the fire out.  It was in a little room on the second floor,
and the strange thing was that it hadn't been used for months, and no
one could account for there being a fire there at all.  After a little
time one of the men came out into the corridor, and said: `There's
something wrong about this--this is not the result of accident!  I don't
like the look of it at all.'  Then he turned to the ladies, who were all
huddled together, gasping and questioning, with their maids and the
other servants in the background, and said: `Ladies!  I advise you to go
back to your rooms as quickly as possible.  There is not the slightest
danger, but it might be just as well to look after your jewellery!'

"You should have heard them shriek!  They turned and rushed like
rabbits, and the maids rushed after them, shrieking too, but that was
nothing to the noise two minutes after, when they got back to their
rooms and found their jewels gone!  They were laid out ready to be put
on, on the dressing-tables, and the alarm had been cleverly timed to
give the ladies enough time to get half dressed, but not enough to have
put on their jewellery.  Only one out of all the party had put on her
necklace.  She _was_ pleased!

"Well, they shrieked, and shrieked, and some of the men left the fire
and came upstairs to the rescue.  Captain Beverley was the smartest, and
he just tore along the corridor to a dressing-room over the billiard-
room, and there was a man letting himself drop out of the window, and
scrambling over the billiard-room roof to the ground!  Captain Beverley
gave the alarm, and the servants rushed out to give chase.  It was very
dark, and they could not tell how many men there were, for they kept
dodging in and out among the trees.  Some people said there were only
two, and some said they saw four, but only one was caught that night--an
idle, loafing young fellow who had been staying at the village inn for a
few weeks, pretending to be a city clerk convalescing after an illness.
The worst of it was that he had only a few of the smaller things in his
pockets, none of the really big, valuable pieces."

"Goodness!"  Darsie's eyes sparkled with animation.  "That _was_ an
excitement.  I wish I'd been here.  Go on!  What happened after that?"

"Oh, my dear, the most awful evening!  The visitors had all brought
their very _best_ things, as the Hunt Ball is a great occasion, and they
almost all cried, and one poor lady went into hysterics.  Her father had
been an ambassador and had all sorts of wonderful orders and things
which she had had made into brooches and pendants, and they could never
be replaced, no matter how much money she spent.  Dinner was the most
weepy meal you can imagine, and only one or two of the sensible ones
went on to the ball.  The others stayed at home and moped, and mother
had to stay, too.  Poor dear! she had to keep calm, and comfort every
one else, when she'd lost all her own pet things.  There was one string
of pearls which has been in our family for generations, and each new
owner adds a few more pearls, so that it gets longer and longer, and
more and more valuable.  It would have belonged to Ralph's wife some
day.  He was so funny about it, so disappointed!  He kept saying: `Poor
little girl! it _is_ rough luck!'  We said: `Why pity her, when you
haven't the least idea who she is?'  He said: `Why not, when I know very
well that I _shall_ know some day!'"

Darsie smiled with politely concealed impatience.  She was not in the
least interested in Ralph's problematical wife, but she was devoured
with anxiety to hear further particulars of the exciting burglary.

"Well, well!  Go on!  You said they only caught one man that night.
That means, I suppose--"

"Yes!"  Noreen sighed tragically.  "That was the saddest part of it.
The next morning they found another man lying just outside the walled
garden.  He had scrambled up, holding on to the fruit-trees, and had
then jumped down and broken his leg, and he was not a stranger, but one
of our very own men--an under-gardener whom we had all liked so much.
Father believed that he had been bribed and led away by the man from
London, and offered to let him off if he would tell all he knew, how
many thieves there had been, and give the names and descriptions of the
ones who had escaped, but he wouldn't.  Nothing would make him speak.
We all tried in turns, and then the Vicar came and was shut up with him
for an age, but it was no use.  They say `there's honour among thieves,'
and it's true.  He wouldn't give the others away, so the two were sent
to prison together, and they are there still.  Father says they won't
mind a few months' imprisonment, for when they come out they will get
their share of the money and be quite rich.  They'll probably sail off
for America or Australia and buy land, and live in luxury ever after.
It _is_ a shame!  Father and mother feel it awfully.  Such a dreadful
thing to happen when you ask your friends to stay!"

"Yes! it's a comfort to have nothing to lose.  Mother has one diamond
ring, which she always wears above the wedding one, and there's nothing
else worth stealing in the house, except watches and silver spoons, so
that Aunt Maria need fear no qualms on account of her present visitor.
No one will set her house on fire on account of my jewels--a few glass
beads and a gold safety-pin, all told!  You see them before you now!"
Darsie tossed her head and pointed towards her treasures with an air of
such radiant satisfaction that Noreen and Ida dropped the effort to be
polite, and pealed with delighted laughter.

"You _are_ a funny girl!  You do amuse us.  It's so nice to have a new
friend.  The girls near here are so deadly dull.  You seem so full of
spirit."

"Too full.  It runs away with me.  I act first and think afterwards.
_Not_ a good principle for a working life," pronounced Miss Darsie
sententiously as she searched among the green leaves for a strawberry
sufficiently large and red to suit her fastidious taste.  The Percivals
watched her with fascinated gaze.  An hour before they would have
professed the most profound pity for a girl who lived in a street, owned
neither horse nor dog, and looked forward to earning her own living, but
it was with something more closely resembling envy that they now
regarded Darsie Garnett, weighted as she was with all these drawbacks.
There was about her an air of breeziness, of adventure, which shook them
out of their self-complacence.  It no longer seemed the all-important
thing in life to belong to a county family, attend the hunt, and look
forward to a presentation at Court; they felt suddenly countrified and
dull, restricted in aim and interest.

It was while Darsie was still conversing in airy, discursive fashion,
and her companions listening with fascinated attention, that footsteps
were heard approaching, and Ralph's tall figure appeared at the end of
the path.  He was evidently taking a short cut through the grounds, and
as Darsie was out of his line of vision, being planted well back among
the strawberry plants, he saw only his two sisters, and advanced to meet
them with cheerful unconcern.

"Hulloa!  Here's luck!  Hasn't she come?"

"Oh, yes!  But it is luck all the same.  Look for yourself!" cried
Noreen gleefully, pointing with outstretched hand to where Darsie sat, a
pale blue figure among a nest of greenery, her little, flushed, laughing
face tilted upward on the long white throat, her scattered locks ashine
in the sun.  With the air of a queen she extended finger-tips crimson
with the strawberry juice towards the newcomer, and with the air of a
courtier Ralph Percival stooped to take them in his own.

For a moment they stared full into each other's eyes, while the
bewilderment on the young man's face slowly gave place to recognition.

"Glad to see you again, Princess Goldenlocks!  Let me congratulate you
on the breaking of the spell.  Who was the kind fairy who set you free
to appear among us in your rightful guise?"

He spoke like a book; he looked tall and handsome enough to be a prince
himself.  Darsie forgave him on the instant for his former lack of
respect, and bent upon him her most dimpling smile.

"I freed myself.  I wove my own spell, and when I was tired of it I
broke loose."

Ralph looked down at her with a slow, quizzical smile.

"You had better be careful!  Spells are awkward things to move about.
They might alight, you know, on some other shoulders, and not be so
easily shaken off!"

His eyes, his voice, added point to the words.  It was the first, the
very first compliment which Darsie had ever received from masculine
lips, and compared with the blunt criticisms of Dan Vernon, she found it
wonderfully stimulating.

"Come along, girls!" cried Ralph with a sudden return to a natural,
boyish manner.  "There's a whole hour yet before tea, and we can't sit
here doing nothing.  Let's go down to the river and punt.  Do you punt,
Miss Garnett?  I'll teach you!  You look the sort of girl to be good at
sport.  You'll pick it up in no time."

The three girls rose obediently and followed Ralph's lead riverwards,
while Noreen and Ida, gesticulating and grimacing in the background,
gave the visitor to understand that a great honour had been bestowed
upon her, and that she might consider herself fortunate in being the
recipient of an unusual mark of attention.



CHAPTER TEN.

A TREATY.

If there were innumerable good points in an acquaintance with the
Percival family, there was certainly the inevitable drawback, for on the
days when she was alone with her great-aunt, Darsie was rendered
lonelier and more restless than before by the knowledge that a couple of
miles away were three agreeable young companions who would be only too
pleased to include her in their pastimes.  The different points of view
held by youth and age were, as usual, painfully in evidence.  Darsie
considered that it would be desirable to meet the Percivals "every
single day"; Aunt Maria was glad that you had enjoyed yourself; was
pleased that you should meet young friends, and suggested a return
invitation, "some day next week!" pending which far-off period you were
expected to be content with the usual routine of morning drive,
afternoon needlework, and evening patience.  Really--really--really, to
have lived to that age, and to have no better understanding!  Letters
from the seaside did not tend to soothe the exile's discontent.  It
seemed callous of the girls to expatiate on the joys of bathing,
fishing, and generally running wild, to one who was practising a lady-
like decorum in the society of an old lady over seventy years of age,
and although Dan kept his promise to the extent of a letter of two whole
sheets, he gave no hint of deploring Darsie's own absence.  It was in
truth a dull, guide-booky epistle, all about stupid "places of interest"
in the neighbourhood, in which Darsie was frankly uninterested.  All the
Roman remains in the world could not have counted at that moment against
one little word of friendly regret, but that word was not forthcoming,
and the effect of the missive was depressing, rather than the reverse.
Mother's letters contained little news, but were unusually loving--
wistfully, almost, as it were, _apologetically_ loving!  The exile
realised that in moments of happy excitement, when brothers and sisters
were forgetful of her existence, a shadow would fall across mother's
face, and she would murmur softly, "_Poor_ little Darsie!"  Darsie's own
eyes filled at the pathos of the thought.  She was filled with
commiseration for her own hard plight...  Father's letters were bracing.
No pity here; only encouragement and exhortation.  "Remember, my dear,
a sacrifice grudgingly offered is no sacrifice at all.  What is worth
doing, is worth doing well.  I hope to hear that you are not only an
agreeable, but also a cheerful and cheering companion to your old aunt!"

Darsie's shoulders hitched impatiently.  "Oh!  Oh!  Sounds like a copy-
book.  _I_ could make headlines, too!  Easy to talk when you're not
tried.  Can't put an old head on young shoulders.  Callous youth, and
crabbed age..."

Not that Aunt Maria was really crabbed.  Irritable perhaps, peculiar
certainly, finicky and old-fashioned to a degree, yet with a certain
bedrock kindliness of nature which forbade the use of so hard a term as
_crabbed_.  Since the date of the hair episode Darsie's admiration for
Lady Hayes's dignified self-control had been steadily on the increase.
She even admitted to her secret self that in time to come--far, far-off
time to come,--she would like to become like Aunt Maria in this respect
and cast aside her own impetuous, storm-tossed ways.  At seventy one
_ought_ to be calm and slow to wrath, but at fifteen!  Who could expect
a poor little flapper of fifteen to be anything but fire and flame!

Wet days were the great trial--those drizzling, chilly days which have a
disagreeable habit of intruding into our English summers.  Darsie,
shivering in a washing dress, "occupying herself quietly with her
needlework" in the big grim morning-room, was in her most prickly and
rebellious of moods.

"Hateful to have such weather in summer!  My fingers are so cold I can
hardly work."

"It is certainly very chill."

"Aunt Maria, couldn't we have a fire?  It would be _something_ cheerful
to look at!"

"My dear!"  Lady Hayes was apparently transfixed with amazement.  "A
fire!  You forget, surely, the month!  The month of August.  We never
begin fires until the first of October."

"You'd be much more comfortable if you did."

There being no controverting the truth of this statement, Lady Hayes
made no reply.  But after the lapse of a few minutes she volunteered a
suggestion.

"There is a grey Shetland shawl folded up under the sofa rug.  You had
better put it over your shoulders, since you feel so cold."

"_I_?"  Darsie gave an impatient laugh.  "Fancy me wrapped up in a
Shetland shawl!  I'd sooner freeze."

Lady Hayes dropped her eyelids and tightened her lips.  Her manner
pointed out more eloquently than words the fact that her guest was
wanting in respect, but as hostess it was her duty to consider the
comfort of her guest, so presently she rang the bell and gave
instructions that a cup of hot cocoa should be served at eleven o'clock
instead of the usual glass of milk.  She herself was never guilty of the
enormity of eating between meals, so that the listener knew perfectly
well for whose benefit the order was given, but being at once cold,
lonely, and cross, her heart was hardened, and she spoke no word.

Between that time and the appearance of James with the tray Aunt Maria
made three successive attempts to open new topics of conversation, which
were each time checkmated by monosyllabic replies.  There was a tone of
relief in her voice, as of one hailing a much-needed assistance, as she
said briskly--

"Now, my dear, here is your cocoa!  Drink it while it is hot.  It will
warm you up."

"Thank you, I don't drink cocoa.  It makes me sick."

There was a moment's silence.  James stood at attention, tray in hand.
Lady Hayes tightened her lips, and the little red lines on her cheeks
turned a curious bluish shade.  Then she cleared her throat, and said in
her most courteous tones--

"I am sorry.  Would you kindly tell James what you would like instead.
Tea--coffee--soup?  A warm drink would be better than milk this
morning."

"Nothing, thank you."

"Nothing, James!  You may go."

James departed.  Aunt Maria went on with her knitting, the click-click
of the needles sounding startlingly distinct in the silent room.  Darsie
sat shamed and miserable, now that her little ebullition of spleen was
over, acutely conscious of the rudeness of her behaviour.  For five
minutes by the clock the silence lasted; but in penitence, as in fault,
there was no patience in Darsie's nature, and at the end of the five
minutes the needlework was thrown on the floor, and with a quick light
movement she was on her knees by Lady Hayes's side.

"Aunt Maria, forgive me.  I'm a pig!"

"Excuse me, my dear, you are mistaken.  You are a young gentlewoman who
has failed to behave as such."

"Oh, Aunt Maria, don't, _don't_ be proper!" pleaded Darsie, half-
laughing, half in tears.  "I _am_ a pig, and I behaved as much, and
you're a duchess and a queen, and I can't imagine how you put up with me
at all.  I wonder you don't turn me out of doors, neck and crop!"

Lady Hayes put down her knitting and rested her right hand lightly on
the girl's head, but she did not smile; her face looked very grave and
sad.

"Indeed, Darsie, my dear," she said slowly, "that is just what I am
thinking of doing.  Not `neck and crop'--that's an exaggerated manner of
speaking, but, during the last few days I have been coming to the
conclusion that I made a mistake in separating you from your family.  I
thought too much of my own interests, and not enough of yours."  She
smiled, a strained, pathetic little smile.  "I think I hardly realised
how _young_ you were!  One forgets.  The years pass by; one falls deeper
and deeper into one's own ways, one's own habits, and becomes
unconscious of different views, different outlooks.  It was a selfish
act to take a young thing away from her companions on the eve of a
summer holiday.  I realise it now, my dear; rather late in the day,
perhaps, but not too late!  I will arrange that you join your family at
the sea before the end of the week."

Darsie gasped, and sat back on her heels, breathless with surprise and
dismay.  Yes! dismay; extraordinary though it might appear, no spark of
joy or expectation lightened the shocked confusion of her mind.  We can
never succeed in turning back the wheels of time so as to take up a
position as it would have been if the disturbing element had not
occurred.  The holiday visit to the seaside would have been joy untold
_if_ Aunt Maria had never appeared and given her unwelcome invitation,
but now!--now a return to Seaview would be in the character of a truant
carrying within her heart the consciousness of failure and defeat.  In
the moment's silence which followed Aunt Maria's startling announcement
the words of advice and exhortation spoken by her father passed one by
one through Darsie's brain.

"If you cannot have what you like, try to like what you have...  Put
yourself now and then in your aunt's place.--A sacrifice grudgingly
performed is no sacrifice at all...  What is worth doing at all, is
worth doing well."

Each word condemned her afresh; she stood as judge before the tribunal
of her own conscience, and the verdict was in every case the same.
Guilty!  She had not tried; she had not imagined; everything that she
had done had been done with a grudge; the effort, the forbearance, the
courtesy, had been all on the other side...  There fell upon her a panic
of shame and fear, a wild longing to begin again, and retrieve her
mistakes.  She couldn't, she could _not_ be sent away and leave Aunt
Maria uncheered, unhelped, harassed rather than helped, as the result of
her visit.

"Oh, Aunt Maria," she cried breathlessly, "give me another chance!
Don't, don't send me away!  I'm sorry, I'm ashamed, I've behaved
horribly, but, I _want_ to stay.  Give me another chance, and let me
begin again!  Honestly, truly, I'll be good, I'll do all that you
want..."

Lady Hayes stared at her earnestly.  There was no mistaking the
sincerity of the eager voice, the wide, eloquent eyes, but the poor lady
was plainly puzzled as to what had wrought so speedy a change of front.
With her usual deliberation she waited for several moments before
replying, studying the girl's face with serious eyes.

"My dear, don't imagine that I am thinking of sending you back in
disgrace.  Not at all.  I will take all responsibility upon myself, and
explain to your parents that I have come to the conclusion that it would
be a mistake to prolong your visit.  It has been very dull for you alone
with an old woman, and I am sure that though you have not always
succeeded, you have at least had the intention of making yourself
pleasant and agreeable."

"No!"  Darsie shook her bright head in vigorous denial.  "I haven't!  I
can be fifty times nicer than that, when I really try.  Let me stay,
Aunt Maria, and you'll see...  It's quite true that I was cross at
first.  I hated giving up the holiday with the Vernons, and there seemed
nothing to do; but I've changed my mind.  I didn't know you, you see,
and now I do, and I--I would like you to be pleased with me before I
_go_!  Please, _please_, Aunt Maria, let me stay!"

"Certainly, my dear, I shall be most pleased."  Lady Hayes still wore a
somewhat puzzled expression, but she was undoubtedly gratified by the
girl's appeal, and Darsie bent forward and kissed her cheek with the
feeling of one who has narrowly escaped a great danger.

"That's settled, and now we are going to live happily ever after!"

"Ah, my dear, I am afraid that is too much to expect!  I have no
amusements to offer you to relieve the dullness.  My health obliges me
to live a quiet life, and I have grown to dread change.  Of course,
there are plenty of books to read--improving, well-written books, very
different from the rubbish published to-day.  If you would like to have
a little reading aloud, or I could give you lessons in knitting and
crochet..."

Darsie laughed, a bright, audacious laugh.

"I wouldn't like it a bit!  I've another plan to suggest, fifty times
nicer and more exciting.  Suppose,"--she leaned her arms on the old
lady's knee and looked gaily into her spectacled eyes--"suppose, instead
of your trying to make me old with you, _I_ tried, for a time, to make
you young with _me_?  Eh?  What do you think?  Wouldn't it be far more
fun!"

"You ridiculous child!"  But Lady Hayes laughed in her turn, and showed
no signs of dismay.  "That would be too difficult an undertaking even
for you.  To make me young again, ah, Darsie! that's an impossible
task."

"Not a whit more impossible than to make me old!" cried Darsie quickly.
"Suppose we took turns?  That would be only fair.  Your day first, when
you would read aloud dull books with the blinds half down; and then my
day, when I'd read funny ones, with the blinds drawn up to the top, and
the sun streaming into the room; your day, when we drove the ordinary
round and came back to lunch; and mine when we went away over the hill
and took a picnic basket and drew up at the side of the road, and ate
it, and got milk from a cottage and drank it out of cups without
saucers!  Your night, when we played Patience; and mine when I showed
you tricks and danced figure dances as we do at school.  I'm _sure_
you'd like to see me dance the Highland fling!  Now--now--promise!  I
_know_ you'll promise.  I can see the softening in your eye!"

"Ridiculous child!" protested Lady Hayes once more, but Darsie was
right; there was certainly a softening in her eye which bespoke a
disposition to yield.  In truth it was not so much of Darsie as of
herself that Lady Hayes was thinking at that moment, for as the young
voice spoke the old heart quickened with quite an agreeable sense of
expectation.  Years since she had read a "funny book," years since she
had partaken of a picnic meal; years--many, many years since she had
looked on while a young girl danced!  Radical changes and innovations in
the routine of life she could not face at this late day, but Darsie's
girlish plan attempted nothing so ambitious.  Let the child have her
way!  It would be interesting, undoubtedly interesting, to see how she
behaved.

So Darsie gained her point, and for the next week she and her hostess
played in turn the part of Mistress of the Ceremonies, to their mutual
benefit and satisfaction.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A DANGEROUS ADVENTURE.

One of the privileges gained by the alliance between aunt and niece was
that the former veto against bicycle riding was withdrawn, and that
Darsie was set free each afternoon for an hour's enjoyment of this
favourite exercise.

In deference to Lady Hayes's nervousness and sense of responsibility the
high-road was avoided as much as possible, and detours taken through
quiet lanes, where traffic was reduced to a minimum; and it was along
one of these lanes that Darsie rode joyously some five or six days after
her visit to the Percivals, bearing in her pocket a return invitation to
her new friends.  She had been longing to meet them again, had keenly
regretted a domestic upset which had delayed the invitation until now,
but all the same the last days had passed wonderfully quickly and
happily.  Afire with resolution to "begin again" and show herself in the
light of a cheerful and cheering companion, she had neglected no
opportunity to make herself agreeable to her hostess, while Aunt Maria
in return had been sweetly considerate, and on occasions quite startling
in her divination of hidden wishes and desires.  The eyes behind the
gold-rimmed spectacles would rest upon the girl's face with an intent
scrutiny which seemed to have the power to draw free confidences, till
to her own surprise Darsie found herself discussing fluently the all-
important subject of her own future, and setting forth her hopes and
fears in relation to a scholarship for Newnham.  On this, as on almost
every topic which came up for discussion, the old woman and the girl
held almost diametrically opposite opinions, but so far Darsie had
contrived to subdue her impatience, and to listen with some appearance
of humility to Lady Hayes's somewhat sententious criticism.

"But I wonder if it can last!" she was asking herself doubtfully this
afternoon, as she pedalled through the sweet-smelling lanes.  "I wonder
if I can possibly go on being so unnaturally good without falling ill
from the strain!  How I hope the Percival girls will be at home!  If I
can let off steam for an hour, and make as much noise as I like, it will
be no end of a relief, and help me to last out without a relapse.  I'd
hate to have a relapse and spoil it all, just when I'm trying so hard;
and she's really a dear, _quite_ an old dear!  I love to please her.
Whenever I begin to feel scratchy I must make an excuse and get over to
the Percivals for an hour to be soothed down.  I do _hope_ they are in
to-day!"

But alas! the butler announced "Not at home," in reply to Darsie's
inquiry, then, seeing the blank disappointment on the young face, he
added graciously: "The young ladies are out for a ride.  They will
probably be home about four o'clock.  Will you not step in and wait?"

Darsie brightened instantly.  Four o'clock, and she had promised to be
back by five.  Yes, she could enjoy half an hour's talk, and still leave
ample time for the ride home, but as it was now barely three o'clock she
did not feel tempted by the prospect of sitting cooped in the house for
so long a time.

"Thank you," she said briskly.  "I should like to wait, but I think I'll
stay in the garden.  Perhaps you would be kind enough to tell them when
they return."

The man bowed and withdrew, and Darsie strolled away in the direction of
the rose pergola, the beauty of which had attracted her so greatly on
her first visit.  She wandered up and down the archways, sniffed at the
fragrance of the late blooms which still remained, indulged in a little
of the sentimental poetising which seems to flow so readily when one is
"alone among the roses," began to grow bored, wandered aimlessly ahead,
grew very bored indeed, and, consulting her watch, was dismayed to find
that only fifteen minutes had passed away.  Fifteen! and there still
remained forty-five before her companions were likely to arrive!  What
could she find to do to while away a whole forty-five minutes?  As a
matter of prudence Darsie put the suggestion of the fruit garden
resolutely aside.  It would not be _safe_ to put herself in proximity
with those tempting strawberries, since on a second visit to a house one
was, unfortunately, not on sufficiently intimate terms to take without
being asked.

She was contemplating getting on her bicycle and taking a short ride
round the lanes, when the brilliant alternative of the river darted into
her mind.  Of course, the river!  Nothing could be more delightful.  She
set off at a trot, taking in her inexperience many wrong turnings, but
arriving at last at the river, or rather the peaceful backwater of the
river which bordered the Percival grounds.  To Darsie's mind the spot
was the most picturesque on the whole estate, and a good many people
could be found ready to agree with her in the conclusion; for the
backwater though narrow was bordered by banks rich in reeds and
bulrushes, while a hundred yards or so below the miniature jetty a pair
of ancient wooden gates spanned the stream, through whose decaying beams
could be seen fascinating peeps of a baby waterfall, and a great moss-
covered wheel which proclaimed the former use of the old grey building
of which it was a part.  In olden times this quiet backwater had been a
busy centre of industry, but the modern inventions of machinery had left
it hopelessly in the rear.  The mill-owner had been ruined long ago, and
the mill-house, with its great panelled rooms, was given up to the
occupancy of the rats, while the disused wheel was green with moss, and
the wooden gateway threatened every day to fall free of its hinges.

The young Percivals could not remember the day when the mill had been
working, but from a personal point of view they deeply regretted its
cessation, for, deprived of the healthy action of the wheel, the little
backwater was becoming every year more choked with weeds, until at some
points it was difficult to navigate the punt.

At long intervals strange men came to investigate the mill and its
machinery, and the Percivals were cheered by rumours of a certain "let,"
but as one rumour after another died away without bringing any tangible
result their hopes had reached a vanishing point, and they paid little
attention to the occasional stirring into life of the dreamy backwater.

Darsie walked to the end of the jetty, stepped lightly into the punt,
and sank down on the soft red cushions.  One might not eat one's
neighbour's fruit, but one might sit in his punt, and arrange his
cushions to fit comfily into the crick in one's back, without infringing
the laws of hospitality.  Darsie poked and wriggled, and finally lay at
ease, deliciously comfortable, blinking up at the sunshine overhead, and
congratulating herself on having hit on the spot of all others in which
to spend the time of waiting.  She could lie here for hours without
feeling bored; it was the most deliciously lazy, drowsy sensation she
had ever experienced.  At the end of five minutes, however, the drowsy
feeling threatened to become altogether too pronounced, and having no
wish either to be discovered fast asleep, or to sleep on undiscovered
till past the hour for her return.  Darsie sat up hurriedly and began to
look around for fresh distractions.

At the very first glimpse the usual temptation for idle hands stared her
in the face, for there on the jetty lay, not only the long punt-pole,
but also the dainty little paddle which she had handled under Ralph's
instructions the week before.  It had been quite easy, ridiculously
easy; the girls declared that she took to it as to the manner born; she
had paddled the whole boatload for quite a considerable distance.
Naturally it would be much easier and lighter to paddle for oneself
alone.  The chain holding the punt to the jetty could easily be slipped
from its ring; there was not, _could_ not be, any danger in paddling
peacefully along a quiet little backwater.  Of course, prudent people
would say--Aunt Maria would say-- But then if you waited until all the
prudent people on earth approved of all that you did, you might sit with
your hands crossed in your lap for the rest of your life!

Darsie tossed her head with the defiant little jerk which meant that she
was _going_ to do it, and she didn't care, and the consequences could
look after themselves.  In another moment the punt was free from the
chain, and was being paddled slowly down the stream.  Really, she told
herself, the solid old craft was as safe as a house; so big, so heavily
built was it that it seemed curious, not that its progress should be
slow but that it should move at all in response to the efforts of one
inexperienced girl!  Glancing over, Darsie could see the weeds rising
from the bed of the stream, sometimes so high that they caught in the
paddle as it worked and greatly impeded its force; still she was
steadily moving along, and, fired with ambition, her eyes fell on a
willow-tree standing out from the bank some hundred yards ahead, and she
determined to persevere until the point should be reached.  To declare
she had paddled "some way"--"quite a long way"--would probably be
discounted to mean but a few yards by the Percival sisters, but "to the
willow and back" was a definite feat which could not be gainsaid.  So
Darsie worked and strained till her arms ached and her cheeks flamed,
till the punt, moving heavily through the weeds, ran at last beneath the
willow branches and found a natural anchorage.

Well, it was good to lie back against the cushions and rest one's weary
arms and back!  Darsie peeped at her watch, saw with relief that she had
still a good quarter of an hour to spare, and abandoned herself to a
lazy enjoyment of the situation.

And then the inevitable happened, for the soothing influence of the
shaded light lulled the tired senses into deeper and deeper
unconsciousness, until at last the fringed eyelids ceased to flicker,
and remained peacefully closed, and, like a happy, tired child, Darsie
rested her cheek on her hand and slept.

Subsequent comparisons proved that her doze might have lasted for half
an hour or more, before a sudden movement of the punt roused her with a
start.  She sat up, blinked sleepily around, and discovered to her
surprise that the punt had moved from its anchorage and drifted into the
centre of the stream.  It had appeared so safely moored against the tree
that she was puzzled to understand how this had come about, but as the
movement had roused her from sleep she was glad that it had occurred,
and, seating herself steadily, lifted her paddle to work her way back to
the jetty.

As she settled herself, however, Darsie's attention was arrested by the
manner in which the banks seemed to be slipping past; she turned her
head over her shoulder, and discovered that in the minute which had
elapsed since she had awakened from sleep the willow-tree had been left
several yards behind.  Some mysterious change seemed to have passed over
the surface of the still, almost stagnant, waters; they were flowing as
with a tide, the rippling movement stirring the weedy banks.  Darsie
used her paddle automatically, but its puny force seemed superfluous,
for the punt was moving of itself, quickly and still more quickly,
swinging broadside to the stream in defiance of her efforts to keep it
straight.  Darsie ceased to struggle and leaned forward on the paddle to
consider the situation.  Then, for the first time, she became aware that
the former stillness of the stream was replaced by a harsh, continuous
noise, which seemed momentarily to increase in volume.  What could it
be?  She stared around with puzzled eyes, but there was no hint of alarm
in her bewilderment.  A child of the city, she was inured to sudden and
inexplicable noises; it was only when the punt swung heavily round a
bend that she realised the seriousness of her position.  The mill was
working!  One of the infrequent experimental trials of which she had
heard was even now in process, the great moss-covered wheel was
revolving creakily on its axle, waking the sleeping river into life, and
the heavy punt was bearing down, more and more rapidly towards the crazy
wooden gates!

In a second all that she had heard on this subject from the Percival
family flashed through Darsie's brain.  The gates were frail, so eaten
by long action of water, that at the impact of a heavy mass they would
almost certainly burst apart, and then--what would happen to the punt
and to its hapless occupant?  Would she be hurled against a broken
boulder, wedged helplessly beneath the debris, or rushed forward into
the swirl of the millpond itself?  Whatever happened it seemed certain
that danger--and serious danger--loomed close at hand, unless she could
succeed in overmastering the current and landing the punt safely at the
little jetty.  At this moment it was not fear but rather an exhilarating
tingling of excitement of which Darsie was most aware.  Here was an
adventure--a full-fledged adventure, such as came but seldom to break
the monotony of life!

For the sake of her future credit she must bear herself bravely, be
swift, resourceful, energetic.  With all her strength she plied the
paddle to and fro, but for all the effect produced she might as well
have sat still upon her cushions.  It would have required an experienced
hand to guide the heavy punt through the sweeping current, and under
Darsie's unpractised strokes it twisted, and turned, and revolved in
aimless and disconcerting circles...  No matter! she was determined to
win; by hook or by crook she must make the left side of the stream and
gain an anchorage.  The jetty or the millpond--that was the alternative,
and it was one to put power into the arm and give staying power to the
laboured breath!  The moments were flying now, the banks seemed to be
flitting past more quickly than ever.  Darsie tried to convert the
paddle into an oar, with which to steer more vigorously for the desired
bank; then came a breathless second of suspense, followed by a sickening
realisation of failure.  The punt had swept past the jetty at a distance
just wide enough to make it impossible to grasp the chain, and was now
bearing straight for the wooden gates!



CHAPTER TWELVE.

DARSIE'S SUGGESTION.

With the passing of the jetty, fear awoke for the first time in Darsie's
breast--the fear which arises when the possibility of action is over and
nothing remains but to sit still and await the end.  In one moment of
time an incredible number of thoughts flashed through her brain; she
thought of her father and mother, of their grief and pain at the
knowledge of her untimely end; she thought of her brothers and sisters,
of Vie Vernon and plain Hannah, and Dan; she saw a vision of them all
garbed in black, sitting round the study fire, enlarging upon her own
virtues and graces; she thought of Aunt Maria and her responsibility;
she saw a vision of herself, cold and still, being dragged out of the
millpond, with her hair floating like seaweed behind her, and at the
thought a wild rebellion rose in her heart, a determination to fight on,
to fight to the end for her precious life!  One or two large trees stood
out from the bank.

Darsie leaped to her feet and, raising the paddle so high above her head
that it caught against the branches, strove to delay the progress of the
punt.  The result was to upset her own equilibrium, and as she fell
forward she screamed loudly, a shrill, penetrating scream of panic and
appeal.

With almost startling quickness the answer came, in the form of an
answering cry, close at hand.  Round the corner of the next clump of
bushes dashed the figure of Ralph Percival, bareheaded, eager-faced,
and, thank Heaven! unhesitating in action.  Not for one fraction of a
second did he hesitate, but with the assurance of one who knows every
inch of the land rushed forward waist-deep into the river; halted there,
and called out a sharp command--

"Your paddle!  Stretch out your paddle towards me!  Hold hard!  Lean out
as far as you can!"

Darsie fell on her knees, and, leaning forward to the utmost extent of
her body, held out the paddle as directed.  There was a moment of
sickening suspense, then came a halt, a jerk that seemed to pull her
arms half out of the sockets, and the punt swung heavily towards the
shore.  The danger was over; she was helped on to the bank, where she
collapsed in a little heap, while Ralph worked the punt slowly along to
the jetty and fastened it to its chain.

_The short_ breathing space had allowed Darsie to recover her self-
possession, to master the overpowering temptation to cry, and to swallow
the lump in her throat sufficiently to be able to say in a weak little
voice--

"You've saved my life!"

"You've spoiled my trousers!" retorted Ralph in a matter-of-fact manner
calculated to put an instant check on sentimentality.  He sat down on
the bank, unfastened his mud-soaked gaiters, and threw them on one side.
"The river's beastly dirty, and the mud sticks like the Dickens.  A new
suit, too!  It will never look the same again."

"I'm sorry."

"So you ought to be.  Things are bad enough as they are, _but_...  How
on earth did you come to be careering about alone in that punt?"

"I was waiting to see your sisters.  I wandered down here, and thought
I'd just sit in it for a rest, then I thought I could just paddle up and
down.  I managed quite well going up the stream; I got as far as the
willow!"  Even at that moment a faint note of pride crept into Darsie's
voice.  "We grounded there, and I--I must have fallen asleep, I suppose,
and that hateful old mill must needs choose the opportunity to begin
working at that very moment...  Just my luck!"

Ralph pursed his lips in eloquent comment.

"If it comes to that, I think you have had a fair amount of luck in
another way!  I heard the noise of the mill and came down to look on.
If I hadn't been there, you'd have been pretty considerably in Queer
Street by this time.  Nice thing it would have been for us to discover
your drowned body in the millpond, and have had to tell your aunt!"

"I thought of that," agreed Darsie meekly.  "It was one of my dying
thoughts.  Don't scold me, please, for I feel so shaky, and you wouldn't
like it if I cried.  It was my own fault, and I got what I deserved.  I
wasn't a bit frightened till I missed the jetty, but that one moment was
like a hundred years.  Did my yell sound very awful?"

"Pretty middling blood-curdling!" replied Ralph, smiling.  "Good thing
it did.  Gave me a bit of a shock, I can tell you, to see the old punt
dashing down to the gates, with you sitting huddled up in the bottom,
with your hair hanging wild, and your face the colour of chalk.  You
looked like a young Medusa."

"Sounds attractive, I must say!  Medusa froze _other_ people's blood,
not her own," declared Darsie, tilting her chin with a little air of
offence, at which her companion laughed triumphantly.

"Oh, _you're_ better; you're coming round again all right!  I was afraid
you were going to faint.  I don't mind telling you that you were jolly
plucky.  Most girls would have started screaming miles before, but you
held on like a Briton.  How do the arms feel now?  Rather rusty at the
hinges, I expect.  The stiffness will probably spread to the back by to-
morrow, but it'll come all right in time.  It is a pretty good weight,
that punt, and I had to pull for all I was worth...  Don't you think
you'd better come up to the house and have some tea?"

"Yes, please.  And you can change your clothes, too.  I should feel so
miserable if you caught cold."

"No fear of that.  I'm used to splashing in and out of the water half a
dozen times a day.  You need have no anxiety about me."

"But--the trousers?"

"Oh, bother the trousers!  I piled that on a bit, just to prevent you
from getting sentimental.  _They're_ all right!"  Ralph paused a moment,
then, "I say!" he cried anxiously, "is this going to get you into
trouble with the aunt?  Need you say anything about it, do you think?
I'll swear to secrecy, if you say the word, and not a soul need know."

Darsie debated the point thoughtfully while the two walked side by side
along the gravelled paths, and finally arrived at a conclusion.

"I think, on the whole, I'll tell!  Aunt Maria allowed me to go out
alone as a great concession, and it was mean to take advantage and run
risks.  So upsetting for her if I were killed in her house!  So I'm in
honour bound to confess, and promise not to do it again."

"You might do something else just as bad!  Probably she'll withdraw her
permission and keep you under her thumb as she did those first weeks."

"She _may_; but I don't think she _will_!  I think she will appreciate
my confidence," said Darsie, with a grandiloquent air, at which her
companion whistled softly, his face twitching with amusement.  He was
much more natural and boyish in his manner than on either of the
previous occasions on which Darsie had met him, and the agitation of the
last few minutes seemed to have carried them in a bound past all the
formalities of early acquaintance.

"Right you are!" he said briskly.  "I like a straight girl.  But if you
don't mind we won't speak of it before the mater.  She's a bit nervous,
and would be always imagining that the girls were going to have the same
experience.  You might warn Lady Hayes not to speak of it either.  We'll
keep it a secret between us."

"Just as you like!  I _believe_," said Darsie shrewdly, "that you're
afraid of being praised and fussed over, as you would be if people knew
that you had saved my life!  Men hate a fuss, but you can't escape my
gratitude.  I didn't want to die.  It came over me with a sort of
horror--the thought of leaving the flowers, and the trees, and the blue
sky, and all the people I love.  Have you ever been so nearly dead to
know how it feels?"

"Once--when I had enteric at school.  It was a near squeak at the
crisis."

"And how did you feel?  What did you think?"

"I didn't care a whit one way or another.  I wanted to have the pillow
turned.  That seemed a hundred times more important than life or death;
I was too ill to think...  Well, thank goodness, you are _not_ dead!  I
hope you'll live for many years to be a pride and glory to--er--er--the
ranks of women blue-stockings!"

Darsie looked at him sharply.

"The girls have been telling you of my ambitions!  Mean of them!  They
might have known you'd scoff.  All boys do, but I fail to see why if a
girl has brains she should not use them as well as a man."

"The inference being--"

"Certainly!  I'm unusually clever for my years!" returned Darsie
proudly, whereupon they simultaneously burst into a peal of laughter.

"Well, you goaded me to it!"  Darsie declared in self-vindication.  "I
can't stand it when boys are superior.  Why must they sneer and jeer
because a girl wants to go in for the same training as themselves,
especially when she has to make her own living afterwards?  In our two
cases it's more important for me than for you, for you will be a rich
landowner, and I shall be a poor school marm.  You ought to be kind and
sympathetic, and do all you can to cheer me on, instead of being lofty
and blighting."

Ralph Percival looked down at her with his handsome, quizzical eyes--

"I don't mind betting that _you'll_ never be a school marm!" he said
calmly; and at that very moment, round a bend of the path, the two girls
came suddenly into view, trotting briskly towards the river.  They waved
their hands, and tore down upon the visitor in lively welcome.

"There you are!  This _is_ nice.  Bates said you were in the garden, so
we just flew and changed, and rushed off in pursuit.  So glad you had
Ralph to amuse you.  The mill's working!  We guessed you'd be there
looking on..."

"There's nothing to see but the old wheel creaking round.  Tea is far
more to the point.  I'm dying for some, and I'm sure--er--Miss--er--
Garnett is, too!  She's had a tiring afternoon."

"Er--Miss--er--Garnett's name is Darsie.  You can always call a girl by
her Christian name till her hair's up," said Darsie quickly, and Ralph
immediately availed himself of the permission.

"All right, Darsie.  It's a jolly little name.  Much easier to say."

Rather to Darsie's disappointment tea was served in the drawing-room in
formal, grown-up fashion, Mrs Percival presiding over the little table,
with its shining silver and fine old-world china.  There were hot, brown
little scones, crisp buttered toast, iced cakes, thick cream, and other
indigestible luxuries, which came as an agreeable change from Lady
Hayes's careful dietary, and Darsie was acutely conscious of the beauty
and elegance of the room.  How small and poky and drab the home drawing-
room would appear in comparison!  How different the outlook on another
row of red-brick houses, from the sweep of green lawns, and the avenue
of great beech-trees seen through the four long French windows which
broke the side of this long, low room!

How different her own life promised to be from those of the two girls by
her side--the girls who had just returned from a ride on their own
horses over their own land! ...  They would never need to worry about
money; their role in life for the next few years would consist in being
pretty and agreeable, wearing charming frocks, visiting at friends'
houses, travelling in summer, hunting in winter, and, finally, making
suitable Carriages, settling down as mistresses of other luxurious
houses, and living happily ever after!

She herself would study and cram for examination after examination; go
through agonies of suspense waiting for results, and as she passed or
failed, obtain a good or second-rate appointment in a suburban school.
Henceforth work, work, work--teaching by day, correcting exercises by
night, in a deserted schoolroom, with three months' holiday a year spent
at home among brothers and sisters whose interests had necessarily
drifted apart from her own!  As the years passed by she would become
staid and prim; schoolmistressy manner; the girls would speak of her by
derisive nicknames...

A knifelike pang of envy pierced Darsie's heart; she dropped the dainty
morsel of cake on to her plate with a feeling of actual physical nausea;
for the moment her old ambitions lost their savour, and appeared grey
and dead; she was pierced with an overpowering pity for her own hard
lot.

The sensation was, perhaps, as much physical as mental, for no one can
pass through a moment of acute mental tension without suffering from a
corresponding nervous collapse, but being too young and inexperienced to
realise as much, Darsie mentally heaped ashes on her head, and shed
tears over her blighted life.  The signs of her emotion were noticeable,
not only in an unusual silence but in whitening cheeks, which brought
upon her the quick attention of her friends.

"Aren't you feeling quite well, dear?"  Mrs Percival asked kindly.
"You look pale.  Would you like to lie down?"

"Darsie, you are _green_!  What's the matter?  You were all right a
moment ago."

"I'm all right now.  Please, please, take no notice.  I'm perfectly all
right."

Noreen was beginning to protest again, when Ralph called her sharply to
order--

"That's enough, Nora!  Awfully bad form to fuss.  Talk about something
else.  What about that garden-party you were discussing?  I thought you
wanted to ask suggestions."

Instantly both sisters were sparkling with excitement and animation.

"Oh, yes, yes.  Of course!  We must ask Darsie.  She has such lovely
ideas.  Darsie, we are going to have a garden-party.  The invitations
are going out to-morrow.  Hundreds of people are coming--mother's
friends, our friends, everybody's friends, every bowing acquaintance for
miles around.  The question of the hour is--_What shall we do_?  Garden-
parties are such monotonous occasions, always the same over and over
again--people sitting about in their best clothes, eating ices and
fruit, listening to a band, and quizzing each other's best clothes.  We
want to hit on a brilliant novelty.  What shall it be?"

Darsie mused, her face lighting with pleasure and anticipation.

"I know nothing about garden-parties.  There aren't any in town.  What
have you done before?"

"Tennis, croquet, clock-golf, ping-pong, archery, yeomanry sports, blue
bands, red bands, black and yellow bands, glee-singers, Punch and Judy,"
Ida counted off one item after another on the ringers of her left hand.
"And now we seem to have come to the end of our resources.  We can't
think of anything else.  Do, like a darling, give us an idea!"

The darling deliberated once more, head on one side, lips pursed, eyes
on the ceiling, while the Percival family looked on, and exchanged
furtive glances of admiration.  She _was_ pretty! prettier by far than
ordinary pretty people, by reason of some picturesque and piquant
quality more readily felt than denned.  It didn't seem to matter one bit
that her nose turned up, and that her mouth was several sizes too large.
"If you described me on paper, I'd sound far nicer, but I look a wur-r-
rm beside her!" sighed Noreen mentally, just as Darsie lowered her eyes
to meet those of her hostess, and inquired gravely--

"How much may it cost?"

It was the question which accompanied every home plan, and on which hung
a momentous importance, but the Percivals appeared quite taken aback by
the suggestion.  The girls stared, and their mother smilingly waved it
aside.

"Oh-h, I don't think we need trouble about that!  It's only once a year,
and we must do the thing well.  If you have a suggestion, dear, please
let us have it!"

"I was thinking," said Darsie hesitatingly, "of a treasure hunt!"

Instantly all four hearers acclaimed the idea with such unanimity and
fervour that the proposer thereof was quite overpowered by the thanks
lavished upon her.

"The _very_ thing!  Why did we never think of it ourselves?  Every one
will like it, and it will keep them moving about, which is always the
great problem to solve.  Presents, presents, lots of presents, stowed
away in odd corners..."

"We'll each take a certain number and hide them in our _own_ pet corners
when no one else is in the garden.  We'll make the parcels up in _green_
paper, so as to be less easy to find..."

"Every one must be told to bring them back to the lawn for a grand
public opening, so that the disappointed ones may join in the fun..."

"We may take part ourselves, mother?  We _must_ take part!  Get lots and
lots of presents, and let us hunt with the rest!"

"Certainly, dears, certainly.  It is your party as much as mine; of
course you must hunt.  I'll run up to town and buy the presents at the
stores.  You must help me to think of suitable things.  Bags, purses,
umbrellas, blotters, manicure-cases--"

"Boxes of French bonbons, belts, scarfs--"

"Cigarettes, brushes--"

"Nice little bits of jewellery--"

Suggestions poured in thick and fast, and Mrs Percival jotted them down
on a little gold and ivory tablet which hung by her side unperturbed by
what seemed to Darsie the reckless extravagance of their nature.  It was
most exciting talking over the arrangements for the hunt; most agreeable
and soothing to be constantly referred to in the character of author and
praised for cleverness and originality.  Darsie entirely forgot the wave
of depression which had threatened to upset her composure a few minutes
before, forgot for the time being the suspense and danger of the earlier
afternoon.

Some one else, it appeared, however, was more remindful, for when she
prepared to depart the dog-cart stood at the door, and Ralph announced
in his most grand seigneur manner--

"We're going to drive you back, don't you know!  Too awfully fagging to
bicycle on a hot afternoon.  Put on your hats, girls, and hurry up."

The girls obediently flew upstairs, and Darsie's protestation of "My
bicycle!" was silenced with a word.

"The stable-boy shall ride it over to-morrow morning.  You're a bit
jumpy still and can't be allowed to run any risks.  I mean to see you
safely back in your aunt's charge."

Darsie scrambled up to her high seat and leaned back thereon with an
agreeable sense of importance.

"I feel like a cat that's been stroked," she said to herself, smiling.
"When you're one of a large family you are not used to fussing.  It's
most invigorating!  I'd like to go in for a long course!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE TREASURE HUNT.

The invitations for the garden-party arrived in due course: one for Lady
Hayes, another for Miss Darsie Garnett, and in the corner of each,
beside the name of a celebrated military band, appeared the magic words
"_Treasure Hunt_."  Darsie felt something of the proud interest of the
author who beholds in print the maiden effort of his brain, as she gazed
upon those words, and reflected that but for her own suggestion they
would never have appeared.  Lady Hayes also seemed to feel a reflected
pride in her niece's ingenuity, which pride showed itself in a most
agreeable anxiety about the girl's toilette for the occasion.

After a survey of the few simple dresses which composed Darsie's
wardrobe, it was pronounced that nothing was suitable for garden-party
wear, and a dressmaker was summoned from the country town to take
measurements for a dainty white dress and hat to match.  The dress was
made to reach right down to the ankles, in deference to Lady Hayes's
ideas of propriety, and Darsie felt prodigiously fine and grown-up as
she peacocked about before the long glass of her bedroom wardrobe on the
day of the garden-party itself.  Never in her life before had she
possessed a gown made by an expert dressmaker, and the result was
surprisingly flattering.  She expatiated on the same with a candour
startling to the audience of aunt and her maid.

"Don't I look s-weet?  So slim!  I'd no idea I was such a nice shape.  I
don't know which looks nicest, the frock on me or me in the frock!
Aren't I tall?  Isn't it graceful when I stand like this, and show the
pleats?  The hat's a duck!  I must say I do look most scrumptiously
nice!"

"My dear!"  Lady Hayes looked both shocked and alarmed.  "My dear, how
_can_ you?  I shall begin to regret my purchases if they encourage a
spirit of vanity.  I was always taught to allow others to praise me and
to keep silent myself."

"But you _thought_ all the time, Aunt Maria, you couldn't help thinking,
and it's worse to bottle it up.  I'm always quite candid on the subject
of my appearance," returned Darsie calmly.  "On principle!  Why should
you speak the truth on every other subject, and humbug about that?  When
I've a plain fit I know it, and grovel accordingly, and when I'm nice
I'm as pleased as Punch.  I _am_ nice to-day, thanks to you and Mason,
and if other people admire me, why shouldn't I admire myself?  I _like_
to admire myself!  It's like the cocoa advertisements, `grateful and
comforting.'  Honest Ingin, Aunt Maria!  Didn't _you_ admire yourself
when you saw yourself in the glass _in_ that ducky grey bonnet?"

Evidently the question hit home, for Lady Hayes made a swift change of
front.

"My dear, my dear, moderate your language!  Your expressions are
unsuitable for a young gentlewoman.  You are growing up.  Try, I beg, to
cultivate a more ladylike demeanour!"

Darsie made a little face at the charming reflection in the glass, the
which Lady Hayes wisely affected not to see, and presently aunt and
niece were seated side by side in the big old barouche, forming one of a
concourse of vehicles which were converging together out of every cross
road, and turning in a seemingly endless string in the direction of the
Hall.  Shut carriages, open carriages, motors of different sizes and
makes, dog-carts, pony carriages, governess carts--on they came, one
after another, stirring up the dust of the road till the air seemed full
of a powdery mist, through which unhappy pedestrians ploughed along in
the shadow of the hedgerows, their skirts held high in white-gloved
hands.

Darsie thought it inhuman of her aunt not to fill the carriage to
overflowing with these unfortunates, but she made no attempt to do so,
but sat up stiff and straight in her seat, a typical old lady of the
olden times, in her large bonnet, grey satin gown, and richly
embroidered China crape shawl.

"If you're not proud of yourself, I'm proud of you!" the girl declared,
smoothing the satin folds with an approving hand.  "You look just what
you are, a dear old fairy godmother who pretends to be proud and fierce,
and is really a lump of kindness and generosity.  All the other old
ladies look dowds beside you."

"Don't flatter me, my dear.  I dislike it extremely," returned Lady
Hayes with such an obvious look of satisfaction the while that Darsie
laughed in her face, and laughed unreproved.

Arrived at the Hall, the guests were escorted through the perilously
slippery hall, on which the mats seemed to turn into fresh pitfalls and
slide beneath the feet; then through a side-door on to a miniature lawn,
in the centre of which stood Mrs Percival, sweetly smiling, and
ejaculating endlessly: "Delighted to see you!  _So_ nice of you to
come!" before passing the visitors on to her husband and children who
were ranged at discreet intervals along the sweep of the lawn.  The
girls whispered dramatically to Darsie that for the time being they were
tied, literally tied by the heels, so she sat demurely by her aunt's
side under the shade of a great beech-tree, listened to the band, spilt
drops of hot tea down the front of her white dress, buttered the thumbs
of her white kid gloves, and discovered the unwelcome but no doubt
wholesome fact that there were other girls present who appeared just as
attractive, or even more so than herself!  Then the band began to play
item number four on the programme, and Noreen Percival came forward with
a sigh of relief.

"At last I am free!  They've all come, or practically all, and we can't
wait for the laggards.  The Hunt begins at three o'clock.  Mother
thought we'd better have it early, as it would shake them up and make
them more lively and sociable.  You'll have to search by yourself,
Darsie, for as we have all done some of the hiding, it wouldn't be fair
to us to go about in pairs.  There are piles of presents, and your eyes
are so sharp that you are sure to find two or three.  You mustn't open
them on the spot, but bring them up to the cedar lawn, where mother will
be waiting with the old fogies who are too old to run about, but who
would like to see the fun of opening.  I _do hope_ I find the right
thing!  There's the sweetest oxydised buckle with a cairngorm in the
centre that would be the making of my grey dress.  I have set my heart
upon it, but I haven't the least notion where it's stowed.  It may even
have been among my own parcels, and of course I can't go near those..."

"If I get it, we'll swop!  I wish I knew the garden better.  I don't
know of _one_ good hiding-place except those I made myself...  Perhaps I
shan't find anything at all."

"Oh, nonsense!  Keep your eyes open and poke about with your feet and
hands, and you can't go wrong.  The paper's just a shade lighter than
the grass.  Remember!"

Noreen flew off again to move a chair for an old lady who wished to
escape the rays of the sun, and once more Darsie was left to her own
resources.  By her side Lady Hayes was deep in conversation with another
old lady on the well-worn subject of a forthcoming agricultural show,
and the town-bred visitor, failing to take an intelligent interest in
prize carrots and potatoes, turned her attention to the group on the
right, where Ralph Percival was making himself agreeable to three
fashionable-looking girls of about her own age.

He wore an immaculate grey suit and a Panama hat, and regarding him
critically, Darsie felt another shock of surprise at being compelled to
admire a _man_!  Hitherto she had regarded the race as useful,
intelligent creatures, strictly utilitarian in looks, as in attire, but
to-day it was impossible to deny that the beauty was on Ralph's side
more than on that of his companions.  The poise of the tall, slim figure
was so graceful and easy that it was a pleasure to behold; the perfect
lines of aquiline nose, and dented chin, the little kink and wave which
refused to be banished from the clipped hair, the long narrow eyes, and
well-shaped lips made up a whole which was quite startlingly handsome
and attractive.  The three girls looked back at him with undisguised
admiration and vied with one another in animated conversation, in return
for which he drawled out slow replies in a tone of languid boredom.

During the fortnight which had elapsed since the date of her
misadventure on the river, Darsie had had frequent meetings with the
Percivals, and now felt on the footing of a friend rather than an
acquaintance.  Concerning the girls, there was no question in her mind.
They were dears, not dears of the same calibre as Vie and plain Hannah,
dears of a less interesting, more conventional description, but dears
all the same, lively, good-tempered, and affectionate.  The only brother
was a far more complex character, with regard to whom Darsie changed her
mind a dozen times a day.  At one time he was all that was delightful,
full of natural, boy-like good-comradeships at another he was a bored
and supercilious dandy, looking down on schoolgirls from an intolerable
height of patronage, and evidently priding himself on a _blase_
indifference.  The present moment showed him in the latter mood, and
Darsie's lips curled as she watched and listened, and in her eyes there
danced a mocking light.  "Like a vain, affected girl!" was the mental
comment, as her thoughts flew back to Harry and Russell, uncompromising
and blunt, and to Dan Vernon in his shaggy strength.  Even as the
thought passed through her mind Ralph turned, met the dancing light of
the grey eyes, and turned impatiently aside.  He would not look at her,
but he could _feel_!  Darsie watched with a malicious triumph the flush
creeping slowly over the smooth pale cheek, the hitch of the shoulders,
the restless movement of the hands which betrayed the hidden discomfort.
Presently some friends came forward to join the three ladies, when
Ralph immediately joined her with an invitation which sounded more like
a command--

"Come for a walk round the gardens!"

Darsie rose, nothing loath, conscious that she was about to be reproved,
and finding an agreeable sense of support in her lengthened skirts, and
the semblance of grown-up-ness which they imparted.

"What did you mean by staring at me like that?"

"Like which?"

"You know very well.  You did it on purpose to annoy me, and make me
uncomfortable."

"Oh no, I didn't!  I didn't do anything.  It did itself.  It was just
the outward and visible expression of my inward and invisible thoughts."

"Pretty middling disagreeable thoughts they must have been!"

"Humph!  Not disagreeable exactly.  Hardly strong enough for that.  Just
amused!"

"Amused!"  The flush deepened on the lad's cheek.  Unwittingly Darsie
had hit upon the most scathing of all indictments.  To be an object of
_amusement_ to others!  What could be more lacerating to the dignity of
nineteen years.  "I had no idea that I was being so funny.  Will you
have the goodness to point out what you found so amusing?"

"Your airs," replied Darsie bluntly.  "And graces!  You asked me, you
know, so I'm bound to tell you.  It's so odd to see a boy like that.
But you needn't be cross.  I'm speaking only for myself.  Those other
girls liked it very much...  You could see that for yourself."

"Just so.  We are talking of _your_ opinion at the moment, however, not
of theirs.  What sort of--er--_boys_ are you accustomed to meet, if one
may ask?"

The strong accent thrown on the word "boys" showed a fresh ground of
complaint.  Darsie felt a twinge of compunction, remembering the episode
of the punt and her own great cause for gratitude.  The answer came with
startling earnestness.

"Not a bit braver than you, nor quicker and cleverer in an emergency.
Perhaps not so good.  If you'd hesitated one moment I mightn't have been
here to criticise.  But, just big, simple boys, not an ounce of
affectation between them.  Of course, they are not handsome.  That makes
a difference..."

But Ralph was not to be mollified by a compliment on his good looks.  He
was irritated, and considered that he had good reason for being so.
Darsie Garnett was an unusually pretty and attractive girl, and having
saved her from a perilous position but a fortnight earlier, it had been
an agreeable delusion to imagine himself ensconced for life in her
estimation as a gallant young rescuer, the object of her undying
gratitude and admiration--a delusion indeed, since the criticism of
those mocking eyes was more than equalled by the explicitness of her
explanations!

Ralph looked injured and melancholy, and Darsie, with characteristic
softness of heart, was instantly seized with compunction.  She was
finding out for herself what every one who came in contact with Ralph
Percival discovered sooner or later--that it was exceedingly difficult
to keep up a feeling of offence against any one who showed his
displeasure in so interesting and attractive a fashion.

He was so handsome, so graceful in movement, he had the art of
concealing the most ordinary emotions behind a cloak of baffling
superiority.  To-day, as he paced the garden paths by Darsie's side,
Ralph wore the air of a lovelorn poet, of a patriot sorrowing for his
country, an artist wrestling over a life's masterpiece, like anything or
everything, in fact, but just what he was--a sulky and empty-headed
young gentleman, wounded in his own conceit!

To her own amazement Darsie presently found herself engaged in the
humble position of "making it up," and in taking back one after another
each disparaging remark which she had made, which, being done, Ralph
graciously consented to "think no more about it!" and strolled off to
speak to a friend, leaving her stranded by herself at the far end of the
garden.

The position would have been an uncomfortable one had it not happened
that just at that moment a bell rang loudly, followed by a sudden
gathering together of the guests upon the cedar lawn.  Mr Percival was
making some announcement which was greeted by bursts of approving
laughter.  The words of the announcement were inaudible to Darsie's
ears, but the purport was unmistakable.  The treasure hunt had begun!
With one accord the guests turned and streamed in the direction of the
gardens, turning to right and to left, peering beneath bushes, poking
delicately among the foliage of flower-beds with the ferules of walking-
sticks and parasols...

Darsie turned and fled like a lapwing along the path leading past the
tennis-lawn and rose and vegetable gardens, to the shaded fern grotto
which formed one of the boundaries of the grounds.  The idea had come to
her to begin, so to speak, at the end and have the field to herself,
but, as is usually the case, she was to discover that others were as
ingenious as herself, for she had soon quite a string of followers along
the narrow paths.

The thickly growing ferns seemed to offer endless hiding-places, but a
printed notice to the effect that "It is not necessary to walk upon the
Beds!" seemed to limit the possible area to that within reach of hand or
stick.  Darsie poked and peered, lifted the hanging fronds which fell
over the rockwork border of the lily pond, stood on tiptoe on the rustic
seat to peer between the branches of surrounding trees, but could
discover nothing in the semblance of a paper packet.  It was the same
story in the rose garden, though the thick foliage on the pergolas
seemed to offer numberless hiding-places for dainty packets, containing
great gear in little bulk; it was the same story in the wide, herbaceous
border, though pathways on either side offered double opportunities for
search.  For the first few minutes the search was pursued in almost
complete silence, but as time went on there came the sound of one
triumphant cry after another, as a busy searcher was rewarded by a
sudden sight of the longed-for paper wrapping.  Darsie's envious eyes
beheld one young girl running gaily past, with no less than three
trophies carried bag-like in the folds of a chiffon scarf.  _Three_!
And she herself had not yet discovered one!  What would the Percivals
say if at the end of the hunt she returned empty-handed?  The surprised
incredulity of the girls, the patronising condolences of Ralph, seemed
in prospect equally unwelcome.  Desire for a present itself became
subservient to anxiety for the credit of her own sharp-sightedness and
intuition.  She _must_ and would discover a parcel before the time limit
was past.

The next half-hour passed in a search ever more eager and strenuous, as
with every moment that passed the chance of success diminished.  So many
treasures had already been discovered that Darsie began to think with a
pang that perhaps there were no more to be found.  Every third or fourth
visitor seemed to be carrying a trophy; some with airs of would-be
modesty were wending their way back to the cedar lawn carrying as many
as three or four, declaring that really and really they must not look
any more--it was altogether _too_ greedy!  As they passed by the spot
where Darsie pursued her ceaseless search, they would pause with words
of maddening advice or condolence.

"Not found anything yet?  How unfortunate!  Look beneath the leaves..."
Once Ralph passed by and arched his eyebrows in eloquent surprise.  He
seemed on the point of offering advice, but Darsie whisked off in the
opposite direction, to take refuge in the least frequented portion of
the grounds, the orchard.

Only ten minutes left!  The bell of warning was pealing loudly from the
cedar lawn, she could hear the merry chatter of the returning guests.

Darsie lifted her muslin skirts and ran quickly in and out between the
trees, searching for some hiding-place as yet undiscovered.  The gnarled
branches seemed to offer endless convenient niches, but in none of them
could anything in the shape of a parcel be discovered.  She was on the
point of abandoning the search and returning empty-handed, when, lifting
up a heavy branch, her eyes suddenly lit upon a cavity in the trunk of
one of the oldest trees.  When the branch remained in its ordinary
position, the hollow was completely hidden from sight; moreover its
position facing the wall made it doubly invisible.  It hardly seemed
possible that so very obscure a hiding-place would be chosen under the
circumstances, but at this last moment no chance could be neglected.

Darsie rolled back her dainty net sleeve, plunged her hand deep into the
hollow trunk, and flushed with triumph as her fingers came in contact
with something loose and soft.  It was not a paper parcel, it felt more
like cloth--cloth with knotted ends all ready to pull.  Darsie pulled
with a will, found an unexpected weight, put up a second hand to aid the
first, and with a tug and a cloud of dust brought to light nothing more
exciting than a workman's handkerchief, knotted round a lumpy parcel
which seemed obviously a midday meal.

It was a disappointment, but the next moment an inherent sense of humour
had discovered its possibilities of the position and gallantly accepted
a second best.

Since she might not possess a proper present, she could at least be the
happy proprietor of a joke!  Into the middle of the ring of guests she
would march, handkerchief bundle in hand, and to her credit would
remain, if not the greatest applause, at least the biggest laugh of the
afternoon!  Darsie drew down her sleeve, brushed the top coating of dust
from the handkerchief, and hurried onwards towards the cedar lawn.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A TREASURE INDEED.

Darsie was one of the last guests to arrive upon the final scene of the
treasure hunt, and already the merry process of parcel opening had
begun.  The young girl who had captured three prizes was on her knees
before a garden seat, laying them out in a row to be seen and admired of
all.  Gaily dressed women were running about appealing to their male
friends for the loan of penknives to cut the encircling string, and the
air was full of the sound of laughter and happy, triumphant voices.

"How lovely!  How beautiful!  Isn't it charming?  _Just_ what I wanted!"

Darsie stood in the background, her hands clasping her bundle behind her
back, so as to screen it from view until the right moment arrived for
its production.  The prize-winners were one and all in such a desperate
hurry to examine their "finds" that she would not have long to wait, and
meanwhile the scene was delightful to witness.

Every one looked gay, and happy and smiling; the many-coloured frocks of
the women made charming flecks of colour against the sombre green of the
old cedar, as they moved to and fro with dazzling, kaleidoscopic effect.
Darsie had never even imagined such a scene; it seemed to her more like
fairyland than the dull work-a-day world.

She looked on, absorbed in delighted admiration, while one after another
the coverings were torn from the dainty packages, and the brilliance of
the scene was enhanced by the glitter of silver, and glass, and dainty
patches of colour.  It would take long, indeed, to write of the
treasures which Mrs Percival had amassed in that day in town; it seemed
to Darsie that nothing less than the contents of an entire shop window
could have supplied so bewildering a variety.  Bags, purses, satchels,
brushes, manicure-cases, blotters, boxes, cigarette-cases, photograph
frames, fans, brooches, bracelets, buckles, studs, tie-pins, waistcoat
buttons--wherever the eye turned there seemed something fresh and
beautiful to admire.

After such an Aladdin's feast, would not her workman's bundle fall very
flat?  With a sudden access of humility Darsie was about to turn tail
and put the poor man's dinner back in its hiding-place, when from across
the lawn she met Ralph's eyes fixed upon her with an expression of
patronising commiseration.  He was pitying her, because she had come
back empty-handed when sharper eyes had reaped so rich a harvest!  That
touch of superiority made short work of Darsie's hesitation.  She would
show that she was in no need of pity, that so far from being overpowered
by failure, she remained jaunty and self-confident enough to turn her
own disappointment into a joke for the amusement of others!  With head
thrown back she marched dramatically forward to the spot where Mrs
Percival stood, the gracious mistress of the ceremonies, and held the
bundle towards her in extended hands.

"Dear child, what have you there?  A bundle--a workman's bundle!  Where
in the world have you discovered that?"

"In the trunk of an old tree, in the orchard near the wall."

"In the orchard?  It belongs most likely to one of the men.  His dinner,
I should say, but what an odd place to hide it!  So dirty!"  She gave a
dainty little shake of distaste.  "I should put it away, dear, really!
It is covered with dust."

"It's a very _lumpy_ dinner," said Darsie, patting the surface of the
bundle with curious fingers.  "I thought perhaps it was a treasure done
up in a different way from the others.  It's heavy, too, far heavier
than bread and cheese.  I can open it, can't I?  Just to make sure!"

"Oh, certainly, if you like--" assented Mrs Percival dubiously, and
Darsie waited for no further permission, but promptly knelt down on the
grass and set to work to untie the knotted ends of the checked
handkerchief.  The surrounding guests gathered around in a laughing
circle, being in the gay and gratified frame of mind when any
distraction is met halfway, and ensured of a favourable reception.  What
was this pretty girl about?  What joke was hidden away in this
commonplace-looking bundle?

The knot was strongly tied, but Darsie's fingers were strong also and in
a minute's time it was undone, and the corners of the handkerchief
dropped on the grass to reveal an inner bag of thick grey linen tied
again round the mouth.

"It _is_ lumpy!" repeated Darsie again; then with a tug the string came
loose, and lifting the bag in her hands, she rained its contents over
the grass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Was it a dream?  Was it some fantasy of imagination--some wonderful
effect of sunshine shining upon hundreds and hundreds of dewdrops, and
turning them into scintillating balls of light, catching reflections
from the flowers in yonder beds, and sending dancing rays of red, blue,
and green across the grass?  Red and blue and green the rainbow drops
gleamed upon the ground, vivid and clear as the loveliest among the
blossoms, but possessed of a radiance which no earth flower had
inherited before.

Darsie sat back on her heels, her arms, falling slack by her sides, her
wide eyes fixed on the ground in a surprise too complete for speech.
Nobody spoke; the stupor in her own brain must surely have communicated
itself to the guests crowding around, for while one might have counted
fifty there was blank, utter silence upon the lawn.  Then suddenly came
a dramatic interruption; a cry, almost a scream, in a high, feminine
voice, and a tall, fashionably dressed woman grasped wildly at a
dangling chain of stones.

"My rubies!  My rubies!  My beautiful, beautiful rubies!  Found again!
_Safe_!  Oh, my rubies!"  She burst into excited sobs, a gentleman came
forward and led her gently aside, but her place was immediately taken by
other women--white-faced, eager, trembling with anxiety.

"Oh!  Oh-h--let me look!  It's the jewels, the lost jewels-- Are my
diamonds among them?  Do you see a diamond necklace with an emerald
clasp?  Oh, _do_, do look!"

"My sapphires!  They were taken, too.  My sapphires!--"

They fell on their knees, regardless of their filmy draperies, and
grasped at one shining treasure after another.  The delicate chains were
knotted together; curved corners of gold had caught in other curved
corners, so that in some cases half a dozen different ornaments
presented the appearance of one big, bejewelled ball, and it was no easy
matter to disentangle one from the other.  The different owners,
however, showed a marvellous quickness in recognising even a fragment of
their lost treasures, and their exultation was somewhat undignified as
they turned and twisted and coaxed the dainty threads, and finally
clasped their lost treasures, safe and sound, and all the time Darsie
sat back on her heels, with her golden hair hanging in heavy masses over
her shoulders, her eyes fixed upon this extraordinary scene, staring--
staring!

"Darsie, dear child, how can we thank you?"  Mrs Percival's low voice
trembled with earnestness; she had lifted a long string of pearls from
the grass, and now held it between both hands, with a transparent
pleasure it was true, but without any of the hysteric excitement shown
by her guests.

"Do you realise all that your workman's bundle contained, or the weight
you have taken off our minds?  It was the thief's bundle, the bundle of
jewels which he stole from the house on the night of the Hunt Ball,
which we have tried so hard to recover!  To think--to think that all
this time they have been hidden close at hand!"

"Hidden with a purpose, too!  Look at this, Evelyn!" interrupted Mr
Percival, holding out a corner of the checked handkerchief towards his
wife, with a stern look on his handsome face--

"`B.W.'  That's Wilson's property!  He was a worse offender than we
thought."

"Wilson?  That was the young gamekeeper, wasn't it?" asked another man--
the husband of the lady who was still crooning over her recovered
diamonds.  "You thought he had been led away by smart London thieves,
but this seems as if he had taken a leading part.  Looks, too, as if
there may have been only himself and Forbes in the affair!"

"Just so!  No wonder Wilson refused to give the names of his colleagues.
When the chase grew too hot he hid the spoils in this tree--evidently
an old hiding-place--before climbing the wall.  If he had made clear
away that night we should never have suspected his share in the theft.
He would have turned up as usual next morning, and expressed great
surprise at the news.  As it is he and Forbes are no doubt patiently
waiting until their sentences are out, expecting to slip back some dark
night and secure their prey.  From such point of view it is a small
business to serve a few months when there's a fortune waiting at the
end!  Well, this takes ten years off my back.  I can't tell you how the
whole business has preyed on our minds.  My dear fellow, I am so
thankful that your diamonds have turned up!"

"My dear fellow, it was fifteen times worse for you than for us!  A most
uncomfortable position; I congratulate you a hundred times.  Just in the
nick of time, too.  In a month or so there would have been no bundle to
discover."

A general gasp at once of dismay and relief passed round the little
inner circle of those most nearly interested in the recovered treasures,
and the first excitement of recovery having passed, every one seemed
bent on lavishing thanks and praises upon the girl through whom the
happy discovery had come about.

"Who is she?"

"What is her name?"

"Where does she come from?"  The questions buzzed on every side, and the
answer, "Lady Hayes's grand-niece," served only to enhance existing
attractions.  Darsie found herself kissed, patted, embraced, called by a
dozen caressing names by half a dozen fine ladies in turn, during which
process every eye on the lawn was turned upon her blushing face.
Through a gap in the crowd she could see Lady Hayes holding as it were a
secondary court, being thanked effusively for possessing a grand-niece
with a faculty for recovering jewels, and bowing acknowledgments with a
bright patch of colour on either cheekbone.  The position was so strange
and bewildering that even yet it seemed more like a dream than reality;
that sudden rain of jewels descending from the linen bag was the sort of
thing one might expect in an Arabian night adventure rather than in the
midst of a decorous English garden-party!  It must surely be in
imagination that she, Darsie Garnett, has been hailed as a good fairy to
all these fashionably dressed men and women!

The almost hysteric effusion of the women who kissed and gushed around
her must surely have something infectious in its nature, since she
herself was beginning to feel an insane inclination to burst into tears
or laughter, it was immaterial which of the two it should be.  Darsie
turned a quick look around, searching for a way of escape, and at that
moment Noreen's hand pressed on her arm, and she found herself being led
gently towards the house.

"Poor old Darsie, then!  She looks quite dazed!" said Noreen's voice.
"No wonder, after all that fuss.  You've been kissed to pieces, poor
dear, and howled over, too.  Silly things! howling when things are lost,
and howling again when they are found!  I've no patience with them; but,
oh, my dear, I _do_ bless you for what you've done!  You've no idea how
relieved we shall be.  It was such a _stigma_ to have your guests robbed
under your own roof, and by one of your own men, too.  Mother has never
been the same since--worried herself into nerves, and fancied every one
blamed her, and thought she'd been careless.  You can't think _how_
happy she'll be writing to the people who aren't here to-day telling
them that their things are found.  She'll feel a new creature."

"I'm so glad.  She's a dear.  Wasn't she sweet and dignified among them
all?  Oh, dear!  I'm all churned up.  I thought as I couldn't find a
treasure I'd have a little joke on my own account, and after all I found
the biggest treasure of all, Noreen! how much money were those things
worth?"

"Oh, my dear, don't ask me!  Mother's pearls alone are worth three
thousand, and that's nothing to the rest.  Mrs Ferriers' rubies are the
most valuable, I believe.  Altogether it must be a fortune--to say
nothing of the associations.  Isn't it strange to think of?  An hour ago
you were a stranger whom scarcely any one knew even by sight, and now in
a flash you have become a celebrity, a heroine--the pet of the county!"

"Am I?  Really?  It sounds agreeable.  I'll write to-night and tell Vie
Vernon, and sign myself `The Pet of the County.'  She _will_ be
impressed.  Pity it wasn't my own county, where it would be of more use.
I shall probably never see these good people again."

"Fiddle!" cried Noreen derisively.  "No chance of that.  Whether you
like it or no, my dear, this day has settled your fate.  You can never
be a mere acquaintance any more.  You've done us a service which will
bind us together as long as we live.  Henceforth a bit of you belongs to
us, and we'll see that we get it!"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A DREAM FULFILLED.

The next week brought with it a succession of bewildering excitements.
From morn till night, as it seemed, the bell rang, and visitors were
ushered in to congratulate Lady Hayes and her niece on the happy episode
of the jewel-finding, and to repeat _ad infinitum_ the same questions,
ejaculations, and remarks.  People who had no personal interest in the
theft seemed, strangely enough, quite as excited and curious as those
who had; and even when their curiosity was satisfied there still
remained the servants in the house, the tradesmen in the village, the
very children in the roads, who seemed one and all possessed with a
thirst to hear the romantic story from the lips of the heroine herself.

Then letters from relations and friends!  However minutely one might
retail every incident, there still seemed an endless number of details
which remained to be told to people who could not be satisfied without
knowing in each case what _he_ said, how _she_ looked, how _you_
yourself felt and behaved!  The first three days were spent in talk; on
the fourth began a second and still more exciting stage.  The bell rang,
a small, daintily tied parcel was handed in for Miss Garnett, which
being unwrapped revealed a red velvet jeweller's box, and within that a
small heart-shaped pendant, slung on a gold chain, and composed of one
large and several small rubies, set transparently, so as to show to
advantage their glowing rosy light.  An accompanying card bore the
inscription, "A small expression of gratitude from Mrs Eustace
Ferriers"; but even this proof was hardly sufficient to convince Darsie
that such splendour was really for her own possession.

"Aunt Maria!  Can she _mean_ it?  Is it really to keep?"

"Certainly, my dear.  Why not?  It is quite natural that Mrs Ferriers
should wish to give you some little remembrance as you were the means of
restoring a valuable heirloom.  It is a good stone.  You must be careful
not to lose it."

"Is it valuable, Aunt Maria--worth a lot of money?"

"It is a pretty ornament, my dear.  Do not look a gift horse in the
mouth."

It was all very well for Aunt Maria, a titled lady with a box full of
jewels of her own, to take things calmly, but for a member of a poor
large family to receive a ruby pendant was a petrifying experience, only
to be credited by a continual opening of the box and holding of it in
one's hand to gaze upon its splendours.  And then the very next morning
the bell rang again, and in came another parcel, another jeweller's box,
and inside it a blue enamelled watch with an encircling glitter of light
where a family of tiny diamonds formed a border round the edge.  There
was an enamel bow also to fasten it on to a dress, but Darsie fairly
quaked at the thought of the responsibility of wearing so gorgeous an
ornament.

"That will do for mother," she announced decidedly.  "It wouldn't be
_decent_ for me to flaunt about in enamel and diamonds when she has an
old gold thing that is always slow.  Besides, if she wears it I can
watch the diamonds flash, and that is the best part of the fun.  Aunt
Maria, that's two!  Do you suppose, should you imagine, that they'll
_all_--"

Lady Hayes looked shocked, as in duty bound.

"My dear, I don't suppose anything about it.  That is not our affair.
It is sufficient that these two friends have been most kind and
generous, and that you ought to be a very grateful girl.  Surmises as to
future gifts are in the worst possible taste."

Darsie wrinkled her nose and sat in silence for several moments, moving
the little watch to and fro to catch the play of light upon the stones.
Then suddenly she spoke again--

"Aunt Maria, what are your ideas with regard to _luck_?"

"I have none, my dear.  I don't believe in its existence!"

"But you must, Aunt Maria.  You must.  It was the merest luck my seeing
that hole, and thinking of feeling inside, but it seems as if it were
going to have such big consequences.  Just in a moment it has brought me
more influential friends than most girls meet with in the whole of their
lives.  They are all grateful to me; they feel that I have helped them;
they want to help me in return; but after all there's no credit to me,
it was all done without one scrap of thought or trouble.  It seems hard
to think that many people work and slave for years, and fail to gain a
quarter as much as I have done by just pure luck!"

"Don't be so sweeping in your assertions, child.  These are early days
yet to talk about results.  When you come to my age, my dear, you will
look back and realise that those who go through life in the right spirit
are never left to the mercy of what you call `luck.'  `Submit thy way
unto the Lord, and _He_ will direct thy path.'  I am an old woman,
Darsie, but I can say from my heart that goodness and mercy have
followed me all the days of my life."

Darsie sat gazing thoughtfully into her aunt's face.  Within the last
weeks a degree of intimacy had developed between the old woman and the
girl, which made it possible for the latter to speak out more openly
than she would have believed possible a short month before.

"Aunt Maria," she said slowly, "I wish you would explain...  You talk of
goodness and mercy, but--don't be shocked!--it doesn't seem to me that
you have so _much_ to be thankful for! ...  You are rich, of course, but
that doesn't count for much by itself, and your life must have been
hard...  You are delicate, and your husband died, and you have no
children--no one to live with you in this big house.  Now when you _are_
old you are so lonely that you are glad to have me--a girl like me--for
a few weeks' visit!  When I go away you will be lonely again..."

A tremor passed over Lady Hayes's face; the thin fingers crossed and
uncrossed themselves on her lap, but she smiled, a brave and patient
smile.  "You are right, Darsie.  I have had bitter trials, nevertheless
I have gained the greatest treasure that is given to any one on this
earth."

"What is that, Aunt Maria?"

"Peace in my soul, child--`the peace of God, which passeth
understanding,'" said the old woman solemnly.

There was silence in the room.  Darsie bent her head, awed and touched
by the sound of those wondrous words.  A month ago, at home with her
brothers and sisters, she would have scoffed at the idea of peace in
connection with Great-aunt Maria, but a closer intimacy had altered her
opinion.  About the trifling affairs of every day Aunt Maria continued
to fuss.  No one could deny for a moment that she fussed; but the big
demands of life found her calm, serene, prepared.  On the surface the
waters might dash occasionally into foam, but the deep, strong current
bore steadily towards the sea!

Darsie pondered, and as though divining the course of her thoughts, Lady
Hayes spoke once more.

"Perhaps that appears to you a serious statement for me to make, since
there are times when I must appear a very unpeaceful person.  I am apt
to be unduly concerned about trifles, to my own exhaustion and that of
others.  I am aware of the fact, and also that to one of your impetuous
disposition such a failing must be particularly trying.  Nevertheless,
Darsie,"--the old voice deepened impressively--"_the peace is there_!"

Slowly, thoughtfully Darsie bowed her head.

"Yes, I know.  I've _felt_ it.  It has made me ashamed.  The human part
of you may get out of hand sometimes, but you are _very_ nearly an
angel, Aunt Maria.  You haven't much more to learn!"

Lady Hayes shook her head, but her hand fell on Darsie's head with a
tender touch, and a light shone in the tired eyes.  The lonely heart was
grateful for those words of encouragement.

Darsie's surmise that still more presents might arrive was justified by
the delivery of three more packets--a dainty little pearl necklace from
Mrs Percival, a turquoise and diamond ring (oh, the rapture of owning a
real ring of one's very own!) and a combination present of a jewelled
bangle from three other ladies who had benefited by the lucky find.
Thus in one short week had Darsie's jewellery risen from a total which
she herself described as consisting of "a few glass beads and a gold
safety-pin" to five separate articles of real beauty and value.

She was fond of spreading her treasures in a row on the table and gazing
at them _en bulk_, moving her head from side to side to enjoy the
flashing colours of the stones, and as she did so Lady Hayes was more
than surprised by a mercenary element which seemed out of keeping with
the girl's natural character.

"Rubies are the most valuable stones, aren't they, Aunt Maria--more
valuable than diamonds?"

"If they are of the right colour and depth, and of sufficient size."

"You said this was a good stone.  It's a ripping colour.  I should think
this must be a valuable stone, wouldn't you?"

"I prefer not to speculate on the subject, child."

Or again--

"I should think this watch was worth lots of money.  I have just
counted, and there are forty diamonds, teenies, of course, but still--
And the enamel is so fine.  My bracelet has five _big_ diamonds, and a
whole heap of pearls; and there's the necklace, too.  Should you think,
Aunt Maria, that they were worth a hundred pounds put together?"

Lady Hayes laid down her knitting, and stared with stony eyes into the
girl's face.

"I have told you before, Darsie, that I excessively dislike surmises as
to the value of presents.  I am surprised and disappointed to discover
signs of an avaricious and grasping nature!"

To her surprise and dismay the only reply to this serious aspersion was
a good-natured laugh.

"Goodness gracious, mercy on us!" cried Darsie audaciously.  "I'm bad
enough, in all conscience, but I'm not _that_!  Not a grasp in me!  You
ask any one at home, and they'll tell you I'm quite stupidly generous.
It's not the money for the money's sake, I think of, but for what it
will _do_!  I've no use for jewels, Aunt Maria--shan't ever have a
chance of wearing them, like Noreen and Ida.  Imagine a daily governess
glittering with gems!  But if only--only I could turn them into money,
it might fulfil the big ambition of my life and send me to Newnham,
without troubling father for a penny!  Can you wonder that I feel
impatient with watches and chains when I think of _that_?"

"I am sorry, my dear.  I did not understand.  I apologise!" said Lady
Hayes promptly.  It was this unfailing sense of justice, combined with
the dignity which never forsook her under any stress of excitement or
agitation, which had been most largely instrumental in attracting the
girl's admiration.  From the impetuous standpoint of youth it seemed an
almost inhuman pinnacle of perfection, but Darsie was quite determined
that at some far-distant elderly epoch--say, in thirty years' time--she
would begin practising these virtues on her own account.  They seemed
the only decorous accompaniment of white hair and spectacles.

She stretched out a sunburnt hand and patted the old lady's shoulder
with an affectionate touch.

"All right!  Don't worry.  It _did_ seem greedy, and of course you
couldn't guess.  You see, it's particularly hard because plain Ha-
Hannah Vernon, I mean--is going up, and that seems to make it worse for
me.  Her father is richer than ours, and he believes in higher
education, so it's all settled that she is to go to Newnham, and she
talks about it all the time, and pities me when she's in a good temper,
and brags when she's not.  And Dan would be at Cambridge, too, and Ralph
Percival, and, oh dear, oh dear, we'd have such _sport_!  Balls, and
picnics, and cocoa parties, and boating in summer--no end of lovely
exciting pranks!"

"Excuse me, my dear,"--Lady Hayes was frosty again, staring stonily over
the rim of her spectacles--"excuse me, but would you kindly explain for
what reason you are anxious to go to Cambridge?  I had imagined that it
was for education, now it appears that balls and picnics are the
attraction.  Which of the two is it of which you are really thinking?"

"Oh, Aunt Maria, I'm a human girl!  Of _both_!" cried Darsie, laughing.
"Education first, of course, because of the result, and all it will mean
afterwards, but if you want the truth, I shouldn't be so keen if it
wasn't for the fun!  We know a girl who's just come down, and it sounds
such a lovely life...  I'd work hard; I love work, and when there is any
on hand there's no peace for me till it's done; but _wouldn't_ I just
play, too!  It would be the time of my life.  Oh, Aunt Maria, when I
look at the governesses at school, and think that I'm going to be like
that all my days, it _does_ seem hard that I shouldn't have just two or
three years _first_ of the life I want!"

The words, the tone, both bore a touch of real pathos; nevertheless Lady
Hayes smiled, as if, so far from being pained by the sad prospect, she
found something amusing in the contemplation.

"It is a mistake to look too far ahead in life, but of course if you
contemplate teaching, you ought to be thoroughly equipped."  She was
silent for a moment, gazing thoughtfully through the window.  Then in a
level, perfectly commonplace voice she continued: "I shall be pleased,
my dear, to defray the expenses of your course at Newnham..."

The manner in which our great ambitions in life meet their realisation
is always and inevitably other than we have imagined.  Sometimes so many
years have passed by since the dreaming of the cherished plans, that the
eager spirit is transformed into a wearied and dispirited being, to whom
fulfilment brings no joy; sometimes it comes freighted with
complications which rob it of half its zest; sometimes it brings no
charm at all, but only bitterness and disappointment; and again--oh,
often again, thank God for His mercies!--it comes at the moment of
hopelessness, of renunciation, dazzling the eyes and heart with a very
incredulity of joy.

Those few quiet words in an old woman's voice transformed for Darsie
Garnett the whole path ahead, making what had seemed a far-away vision
become a solid, tangible fact.  Quietly, prosaically, without any
nourish of trumpets, the great prize of life had been handed into her
grasp.

She sat motionless, staring with distended eyes, while Lady Hayes
continued to speak in calm, even tones.

"I should like to explain to you, my dear, that I am not as rich a woman
as I appear.  It was my dear husband's wish that I should continue to
occupy this house for the term of my life, but after that it passes to
his relations.  It is an expensive place to keep up, and leaves little
margin out of the income which goes with it.  I cannot save as I should
have wished, and my own property is not large.  When it is divided among
my various nephews and nieces, there will not be much for each.  I
should like to have done more for your father, as he has a large family
to provide for, but it is impossible.  In your case, however, you have
done me a kindness in spending these weeks with me when I needed
companionship--and, I think, we are good friends!  I can spare a few
hundreds to give you your training _and_ your fun--and it will be a
pleasure to me to do so.  I will make a formal arrangement in my will so
that in the case of my--so that in any case the money may be
forthcoming.  So, my dear, you may look upon the matter as settled, and
make your arrangements accordingly."

Darsie put her hands to her head.  Her cheeks were white, but around her
eyes and nose an increasing pinkness of hue betrayed the inward struggle
of emotion.

"I'm going to cry!  I'm going to cry!" she cried.  And when Lady Hayes
began a protest, "Oh, Aunt Maria, don't, _don't_ be proper!" she pleaded
piteously.  "I can't bear it just now.  Please, please let me thank you
in my own way!  I must howl!  I _must_!  I'm all seething and churning
with emotion, and if I don't cry I shall burst; but oh, I _do_ love
you--I adore you--I shall worship you until my dying day...  You'll be
like a saint to me.  I'll put you up on a pedestal and burn incense to
you every day of my life.  If you _knew_ what it meant!  And I've been
so mean and hateful--such a contemptible little worm!  Oh, if I lived a
hundred thousand years, I could never repay you for this!"

"My dear, does it strike you that you are talking in a very wild,
exaggerated fashion?"

"I am, I am!  Girls _do_, Aunt Maria, when they are off their heads with
joy.  Wild, I mean, not exaggerated--I mean it, every word.  Oh, I
_must_ hug you.  Never mind your cap; I must give you a bear hug, if I
die for it.  Dear, dearest, kindest, best--"

The old lady's stiff, upright figure disappeared bodily within the
swooping arms; she was squeezed, hugged, rocked to and fro, and pelted
with kisses until she was speechless and gasping for breath.  When she
was released her cap was askew, and the muslin folds in the front of her
gown crumpled out of recognition; but for a marvel she spoke no word of
reproach, and Darsie saw, with a sobering thrill, a glitter as of tears
in the old eyes, and the mental question which arose at the sight was
answered with intuitive sharpness.  It was so long since she had been
hugged before, so many, many years since anything more than a
conventional peck had been pressed upon her cheek!  Old, stern, proper
as she was, Aunt Maria loved to be loved!

For the rest of the morning Darsie was as subdued and gentle in manner
as she had hitherto been boisterous.  The future was discussed in
detail, and plans made which revolutionised more and more her future
life, for Lady Hayes seemed to take for granted that in taking upon
herself the responsibility for the girl's education she had earned a
certain right to her society.  Such phrases as "And in the holiday-time
we can discuss," "When you are here in the summer vacation," "I shall
look forward to hearing your descriptions," could not be misunderstood,
but for the moment the big gain outweighed the loss, and Darsie smiled
on unperturbed.  In time to come the sacrifice of merry family holidays
would of a certainty demand its toll of suffering, but why encourage
trouble that lay ahead when the present was so blissfully full of
contentment?

When lunch was over Darsie tucked her hostess on the sofa, and hailed
with delight the opportunity of a free hour in which to dream
uninterrupted over the wonderful development of the day.

"I'll go out and walk it off.  I'll rush down to the village and
telegraph home.  I can't possibly wait to write.  How can I put it so
that it will be plain enough and not too plain?  `Newnham ahoy!'  `I'm
off to Newnham College in the morning!'  `Plans for Newnham
satisfactorily arranged.  Break news to Hannah.'  _Won't_ they stare!
It's a blessing that neither Clemence nor Lavender would care to go if
they had the chance, so they won't be jealous, but Hannah _will_ jump.
And Dan--what will Dan say?  It is good luck knowing the boys so well.
We'll make them take us about.  To think that I was so furious and
rebellious about this visit, and that it should have ended like this!
It will be a lesson to me for life!"

It was very pleasant to ride through the sweet smelling lanes on this
bright summer afternoon; very pleasant work sending off that telegram to
the parents at the seaside, and drawing mental pictures of the
excitement and rejoicings which would follow its arrival; pleasant to
meet on every side kindly, interested glances, and to realise that if
she were, as Noreen had declared, "the pet of the county," she was
assuredly also "the heroine of the village."

It was a temptation to linger in the quaint little streets; but on this
afternoon of all others Darsie was anxious not to be late for tea, so,
with a sigh of regret, she turned up a side lane leading to the field
path to the Manor, and in so doing came face to face with Ralph
Percival, who, in his lightest and most sporting attire, was escorting a
pack of dogs for an airing.  There was the big silky-haired collie whom
Darsie loved, the splay-footed dachshund which she hated, the huge
mastiff which she feared, with one or two terriers of different breeds--
alert, friendly, and gentle-eyed.  One and all came sniffing round her
as their master stopped to shake hands, and she stood up stiff and
straight, trying to look at ease, and as if she were not really in
momentary terror of an attack upon her ankles and skirts.

"Halloa!"

"How are you?  Still living in a shower of jewels?"

"I _have_ been, but it's clearing off!  The combination bracelet
finished the list.  Now I'm beginning to live in fear of another
burglary, on myself.  It will be a relief to get the things distributed.
Mother is to have the watch, Clemence the pendant, Lavender the brooch,
and I am going to be greedy and keep the bracelet and necklace and ring
for myself."

"What a miser!" cried Ralph, laughing.  His grey eyes looked very
handsome and agreeable lit up with the twinkling light of amusement, and
Darsie's spirits rose still a degree higher as he whistled to the dogs
and turned round with the evident intention of accompanying her home.

"We'll come along with you.  It doesn't matter where we go so long as we
have a run.  Bound for the Manor, I suppose?  How's the old lady?  In a
good humour, I should say.  You look particularly full of beams this
afternoon!"

"I am--brimming over!  You see before you, kind sir, the touching
spectacle of a young female who has not a single ungratified wish in the
world, and is so happy that she doesn't know how to preserve a decent
appearance of calm.  It's the more extraordinary because she usually
wants quite a lot."

Ralph's eyebrows went up in expressive disdain.

"Re-al-ly!  You don't say so!  Glad to hear it, I'm shaw!  The kind
donors would be much gratified to know of the magic effect of their
gifts.  I wonder, under the circumstances, that you could bear to part
from any of them!"

The words were spoken in his most drawling and superior voice, and
brought the blood rushing into Darsie's cheeks.  She stood still in the
middle of the road, and glared at him with flashing eyes.

"Horrible boy!  What a disagreeable mind you must have, to think such
mean, contemptible thoughts!  Bother the jewellery!  It may go to
Jericho for all I care.  I'm happy for a very different reason.  Aunt
Maria has just promised to pay for me to go to Newnham, and that has
been the dream of my life.  There's nothing to sneer at, you see, though
perhaps _you_ can manage to be superior even about that!"

"Yes, easily.  I hate blue-stockings," said Ralph calmly, but his eyes
twinkled as he spoke, and in spite of herself Darsie was obliged to
smile in response.

"And I hate narrow-minded, prejudiced young men!  Oh dear! you've put me
in a bad temper on this day of days, just when I felt that I could never
be cross again.  I'll forgive you only because it's impossible to go
_on_ being cross.  I've just been to the post-office to telegraph the
great news to my people at the seaside.  They'll be wild with
excitement, especially my chum who will be going up at the same time,
Hannah Vernon--`plain Hannah' we call her.  Funny nickname, isn't it?"

"Sounds ingratiating!"  Voice and expression were alike so expressive
that Darsie went off into a merry trill of laughter, as she hastened to
take up the cudgels in plain Hannah's defence.

"She doesn't care a bit.  Jokes about it with the rest.  And she is so
funnily ugly that it's really rather dear.  _And_ clever!  She'll be a
first-class girl, you'll see if she isn't.  I shall be nowhere beside
her, but I'm going to _grind_.  Let me see: if we go up in three years'
time, when we're eighteen, how long will you have left of your course?"

"Perhaps a year, perhaps two.  Depends upon how soon I go up.  It isn't
as if I had to go in for a profession or anything of that kind.  I shall
spend my life looking after the property, and there's no particular need
to swot for that."

"I hate loafers," said Darsie in her turn, then once more relented and
said genially, "But I don't believe you mean half that you say.  Anyway,
I shall look forward to meeting you at Cambridge, and I hope you are
prepared to be kind, and to be ready to return the good offices which I
have been able to render to your respected family."

"I am.  What do you want me to do?"

"To be nice to me at Cambridge!  I shall be a shy, lone Fresher, and you
can make things much livelier for me if you like.  I want you to like!
Dan Vernon will be there, too, but he's so serious and clever that he
won't be much good for the _fun_ part.  I want you to promise not to be
superior and proud, but a real friend to take us about, and dance with
us at the balls, and get up picnics on the river.  I can manage the work
part for myself, but I want some help for the fun!"

She expected an instant response, but Ralph was too cautious to be drawn
into rash promises.

"Er--what exactly do you mean by `we'?"

"Myself and my chum, of course--Hannah Vernon."

"Plain Hannah?"

"Plain Hannah!"

Ralph shook his handsome head.

"I make no promise as regards plain Hannah.  I'm not particularly
partial to plain Hannahs, but I'll do my level best for Darsie Garnett.
Like to!  You can count upon me to do my best to give you a rattling
good time."

Darsie regarded him doubtfully, reflected that it was wisdom to accept
what one could get, and smiled a gracious approval.

"Thanks--so much!  Then it's a promise?"

"Certainly.  A promise!"

They laughed again.  The dogs leaped in the air and barked with delight.
Everything and every one seemed happy to-day.  Darsie felt that if she
lived to be a hundred she could never, by any possibility, reach a
higher pinnacle of content.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

AFTER THREE YEARS.

"Is your trunk ready, Darsie?  Are you ready to come down?  Lunch is on
the table and we're all waiting.  Have you fitted everything in?  Oh
dear, oh dear, how bleak and bare the room does look!  I shall never
have the heart to enter it after you're gone."

Clemence Garnett, aged twenty years, gave a pitiful glance round the
dismantled room, which a few hours before had been decorated with the
many and varied objects which were Darsie's treasures.  She looked at
the wooden wardrobe, the doors of which swung wide, showing a row of
empty pegs, at the scattering of paper and rejected ends of ribbon and
lace which littered the floor, and finally back at the figure of Darsie
herself, kneeling before the great black trunk, with her golden hair
ruffling round a flushed, eager face.

"Sit on it, Clemence, like a lamb.  It's _got_ to meet, but it's inches
apart still.  Sit down with a flop, and be your heaviest, while I fight
with the lock."

"Better take something out.  If you make it so full, it may burst half-
way.  How would you like that?"

"Not much; but better than leaving anything behind.  It wouldn't dare to
burst after costing so much money.  There!  It's done.  You're a pretty
substantial weight, my dear.  Now then for lunch and a rest; I've had a
terrific morning."

Darsie rose to her feet and stood for a moment before the mirror,
putting a tidying touch to hair and dress.  She was a tall, slim girl,
nearly a head taller than the more substantial Clemence, and the easy
grace which characterised her movements was the first thing which
attracted an unaccustomed eye.  Even Clemence, with perceptions dulled
by custom, felt dimly that it was an agreeable thing to watch Darsie
brush her hair and shake out her skirts, though in another person such
acts would be prosaic and tiresome.  The crisp hair needed nothing but a
brush and a pat to settle itself into a becoming halo of waves, and the
small face on the long white neck had a quaint, kitten-like charm.
Clemence looked from the real Darsie to the reflected Darsie in the
glass, and felt a sudden knife-like pang.

"Oh, how I _hate_ you going!  How dull it will be.  Why _couldn't_ you
be content to stay at home instead of taking up this Newnham craze?  I
shall miss you hideously, Darsie!"

Darsie smiled involuntarily, then nobly tried to look sad.

"I expect you will, but one grown-up at home is as much as we can
afford, and there'll be lovely long vacs.  You must think of those, and
the letters, and coming up to see me sometimes, and term time will pass
in a flash.  I'll be back before you realise that I'm gone."

Clemence pouted in sulky denial.

"Nothing of the sort.  It will seem an age.  It's easy to talk!  People
who go away have all the fun and excitement and novelty; it's the poor
stay-at-homes who are to be pitied.  How would you like to be me,
sitting down to-morrow morning to darn the socks?"

"Poor old Clem!" said Darsie lightly.  A moment later, with relenting
candour, she added: "You'll like it a lot better than being examined by
a Cambridge coach!  So don't grouse, my dear; we've both got the work we
like best--come down to lunch, and let's see what mother has provided
for my go-away meal!"

Darsie slid a hand through Clemence's arm as she spoke and the two
sisters squeezed down the narrow staircase, glad in their English,
undemonstrative fashion of the close contact which an inherent shyness
would have forbidden except in this accidental fashion.  Across the oil-
clothed passage they went, into the red-walled dining-room, where the
other members of the family waited their arrival.

Mrs Garnett smiled at the traveller with a tinge of wistfulness on her
face; the four young people stared, with a curiosity oddly infused with
respect.  A girl who was on the eve of starting for college had soared
high above the level of ordinary school.  Lavender, at "nearly
seventeen," wore her fair locks tied back with a broad black ribbon; her
skirts reached to her ankles; she was thin and angular; her head was
perpetually thrust forward, and a pair of spectacles were worn
perpetually over the bridge of her pointed little nose.  The description
does not sound attractive, yet in some mysterious manner, and despite
all drawbacks, Lavender _did_ manage to be attractive, and had a select
band of followers at school who practised stoops and poked-out heads out
of sheer admiration of her defects.

Harry's voice was beginning to croak, which, taken together with a
dawning passion for socks, ties, and brilliantine, was an unmistakable
sign of growing up; Russell was preternaturally thin and looked all arms
and legs; while Tim had forsaken knickers for full-fledged trousers, and
resented any attempt at petting as an insufferable offence.

One and all were on their best company manners on the occasion of
Darsie's last lunch, and the most honeyed replies took the place of the
usual somewhat stormy skirmish of wits; nevertheless, there was a
universal feeling of relief when the meal was over, and a peal at the
bell announced the arrival of the cab which was to convey Darsie and a
girl companion on the first stage of their journey.

If anything could have added to Darsie's joy in the fulfilment of a
lifelong ambition, it would have been the fact that Hannah Vernon was to
be her companion at Newnham, as she had been through the earlier
schooldays.  All the Vernon family were dears of the first water, and
might have been specially created to meet the needs of their neighbours,
the Garnetts.  It is true that the Vernons possessed the enviable
advantage of a big grown-up brother, but when the Garnetts felt
particularly tried on this score, they sought comfort from the
reflection that a brother so solemn and scholarly, so reserved and
unresponsive, hardly counted as a brother at all.  Dan was already in
the second year of his Cambridge course, and was expected to do great
things before he left.  So far as such a sober person could be made
useful, Darsie Garnett intended to use him towards the furtherance of
her own enjoyment of the new life.

For the rest, Vie, the eldest daughter of the Vernon household, was the
sworn ally and confidante of Clemence, and John, the younger son, was in
himself such a tower of mischievous strength that the Garnett trio sat
at his feet.  Last, but certainly not least, came Hannah, and Hannah
was--Darsie would have found it an almost impossible task to describe
"plain Hannah" to an unfortunate who had not the honour of her
acquaintance.  Hannah was Hannah, a being distinct by herself--
absolutely different from any one else.  To begin with, she was
extraordinarily plain; but, so far from grieving over the fact, Hannah
wore it proudly as the foremost feather in her cap.

It was she herself who had originated and sanctioned the continued use
of the sobriquet, which had its origin in a juvenile answer given by
herself to a stranger who inquired her name.

Now Hannah was the only member of the family who was limited to one
cognomen, so she answered unthinkingly, "Hannah; _plain_ Hannah!" and
instantly descrying the twinkling appreciation in that stranger's eyes,
she twinkled herself, and henceforth led the adoption of the title.
Long use had almost deadened its meaning in the ears of the family, but
strangers still suffered at the hearing.

Plain Hannah's face peered cheerily out of the cab window, her little
eyes twinkled merrily, her preposterous eyebrows arched in derision of
the melancholy group upon the doorsteps.  No one dared shed a tear when
she was so evidently on the watch for any sign of weakness, sentimental
farewells were checked upon the speaker's lips, and the whole business
of parting assumed a lighter, a more matter-of-fact air.

A second big box was hoisted on to the cab roof, a few kisses
shamefacedly exchanged, and then the travellers were off, and nothing
remained to the watchers but to trail drearily back into a house from
which half the brightness seemed to have departed.

Well might Clemence say that the worst pain of a parting fell on those
who were left behind!  While the stay-at-homes struggled heavily through
a long afternoon, in every moment of which the feeling of loss became
even more acute, Darsie and plain Hannah were enjoying one of the most
exciting experiences of their lives.

In spite of an almost lifelong interest in Cambridge, neither girl had
as yet visited the town itself, so that each incident of the journey was
full of interest and excitement.  The station was disappointingly like
other stations, and they had abundant opportunity of examining it at
leisure, since the porters rushed in a body to attend to the male
students who had arrived at the same time, and who could be trusted to
give larger tips than their female companions.  The drive through the
streets also fell short of expectations; but, after all, Cambridge meant
Newnham, and there could be no disappointment there!  Peered at through
the cab window, the building appeared unexpectedly large and imposing.
It gave one a thrill of importance to realise that for the next three
years one would be part and parcel of its life, an inhabitant of its
great halls.

The cabman descended from the box and rang a peal at the bell, and it
came as something as a shock to see an ordinary-looking maid throw open
the door, though what exactly they had imagined the girls would have
found it difficult to say.  The maid inquired their names, led them
forward through a long corridor, and flung open the door of a sitting-
room where a lady sat before a desk.  It was a pretty, cheerful-looking
apartment, full of flowers, books, pictures, and quaint old-world
furniture, and the lady herself looked so much like other middle-aged
ladies, that if you had not known it you would never have suspected her
of being the Vice-President of a Women's College.

She was kind and agreeable.  She shook hands, and hoped you were well;
hoped you had had a pleasant journey, hoped you would be happy in
College, hoped you would like your rooms; but there was a certain
mechanical quality in her voice which betrayed the fact that she had
said the same thing over and over again on innumerable occasions, would
say it twenty times or more this very afternoon, and that your own
personal arrival left her perfectly calm and cool.

The girls stuttered and stammered in response, felt vaguely crestfallen,
and worried as to what they should do next, but the Vice herself was in
no doubt.  "She hoped they were ready for tea," and with a wave of the
hand summoned the maid to lead them a stage forward on their journey.

The second stage deposited the new-comers in the dining-hall, where tea
was already in progress, and about a dozen disconsolate-looking Freshers
were munching at bread-and-butter and cake in a silence which could be
felt.  Apparently Darsie and Hannah were the only ones of the number
lucky enough to have come up in pairs, but even their tried powers of
speech were paralysed beneath the spell of that terrible silence, and
still more so by the relentless scrutiny of those twelve pairs of eyes.
And how those Freshers _did_ stare!  The whites of their eyes positively
shone, as with one accord the pupils turned towards the opening door.
They had been stared at themselves, had come through the ordeal of being
the last arrival; now, with thanksgiving, they were revenging themselves
upon fresh victims!  Darsie felt a horrible certainty that she would
drop her cup, and spill the tea over the floor; plain Hannah munched and
munched, and looked plainer than ever, with her shoulders half-way up to
her ears and her chin burrowed in her necktie.

Presently the door opened again, and another Fresher entered, cast a
frightened glance around, and subsided on to the nearest chair, while
every eye turned to gaze upon her, in her turn.  This programme was
enacted several times over before Darsie and Hannah had finished tea,
and were ready to be escorted to the upstairs apartments, which were to
act as bedroom and study combined.

Mercifully the rooms were close together, so that, leaving Darsie half-
way along the corridor, the maid could point to a door near at hand,
where she could join her friend when her inspection was complete.  She
entered with the feeling of one on the threshold of a new life, and
stood gazing around in mingled disappointment and delight.  The first
impression was of bareness and severity, an effect caused by the absence
of picture or ornament of any kind.  A small white bed stood in one
corner; a curtain draped another, acting as a substitute for a wardrobe;
a very inadequate screen essayed unsuccessfully to conceal a wooden
washstand, and a small square of glass discouraged vanity on the part of
an occupant.  So far, bad! but, on the other hand, the room contained
inexpensive luxuries, in the shape of an old oak chest, a bureau, a
standing bookcase, and a really comfortable wicker chair.

Darsie could hardly believe that these treasures were meant for her own
use; it seemed more likely that they had belonged to a former student,
who would presently demand their return.  She was sorrowfully resigning
herself to this contingency when the door burst open, and in rushed
Hannah, aglow with excitement.

"I've got a chest, and a bookcase, and a bu--"

Her eyes rounded with surprise.  "I say!  So have you--I thought I _was_
swag!  Do you suppose it's the usual thing?"

"Can't say.  Topping for us if it is.  But the screen's a wretch, and
the walls will need a _lot_ of covering.  My few mites of pictures will
go nowhere.  There's not _too_ much room for our clothes, either.  We'd
better unpack, I suppose, and get out things for dinner.  What are you
going to wear?"

"Oh, something--whatever comes handy," replied plain Hannah in her most
casual manner.

The subject seemed to her of infinitesimal importance; but Darsie went
through many agitations of mind before she decided on a high-necked
summer frock, and then suffered still keener pangs because, on
descending to Hall, several Freshers were discovered in full evening
dress, and, in her imagination at least, eyed her lace yoke with
disdain.

Dinner was almost as silent as tea--an ordeal of curious, appraising
eyes, as each Fresher continued to stare at every other Fresher,
condemning her mentally for want of frankness and kindliness, while
utterly neglecting to practise these virtues on her own account.  Then
one by one the girls slunk upstairs, tired, shy, and homesick, and crept
gratefully into their narrow beds.

Sleep was long in coming to Darsie Garnett that night: she lay awake
hour after hour, living over again in thought the events of the last
three years.

First and foremost her thoughts went back to the old great-aunt to whose
generosity she owed the present fulfilment of her ambition.  Until Lady
Hayes's death, a year ago, Darsie had spent the major part of her
holidays at The Towers, and the friendship between the old woman and the
girl had developed into a very real affection.

It had been a wonderful experience, Darsie reflected, to watch the
gradual mellowing of character, the patient endurance of suffering, the
peaceful death which was so truly a "falling asleep."  Until that time
Darsie had felt all a girl's natural shrinking from death, but the sight
of Aunt Maria's peaceful face had dissipated that fear once for all.  As
she knelt by the bedside looking at the still, majestic features, she
offered the most fervent prayer of her life--a prayer that she, too,
might be enabled to "submit her way," and so in the end find peace in
her soul!

Her acquaintance with the Percival family had ripened into friendship,
so that, though Noreen and Ida could never by any chance supplant the
Vernon sisters, there were moments when she actually felt more at home
with Ralph than with queer, silent Dan.

Ralph, at twenty-one, had outgrown many of his boyish failings--or
rather, as Darsie shrewdly surmised, had attained the art of screening
them from _view_.  Instead of snubbing his sisters' friends and adopting
airs of haughty superiority, he was now all deference and attention,
transparently eager for her society.  Dan, on the contrary, was absorbed
in work; he had taken the Longs in summer, so that Darsie had no chance
of meeting him before starting on her annual visits to Lady Hayes.  In
the Easter vac. he had visited France and Germany to study languages,
while at Christmas-times he was at once too shy and too busy to take
part in the daily excursions indulged in by his brothers and sisters.
He was doing brilliantly at College, and as a better preparation for his
life's work had decided on a four-years course--taking the Tripos in two
parts, in both of which it was a foregone conclusion that he would take
a first-class.

Ralph Percival was contentedly slacking it in preparation for a pass
degree.  "What did it matter?" he demanded serenely.  One came to
Cambridge, don't you know, because all one's people had been there,
because it was the thing to do, and a rattling old place for sport and
having a good time.  He would be confoundedly sorry when it was over.
Only wished he could slack it out for twice as long!

Darsie first frowned, and then smiled to herself in the dark as she
recalled those utterances, and the actions fitly symbolised her
sentiments towards the heir of the Percivals.  Her head had no mercy for
such an utter want of ambition and energy, but the heart plays often a
bigger part than the head in an estimate of a fellow-creature, and
Darsie's heart had a way of making excuses for the handsome truant, who
smiled with such beguiling eyes, had such a pretty knack of compliment,
and was--generally!--ready to play knight-errant in her service.  She
felt herself lucky in possessing so charming a friend to act the part of
gallant, and to be at her service when she chose to call.  And then
quite suddenly she drew a sharp breath and said aloud in a trembling
voice, "Oh, Aunt Maria, dear Aunt Maria!" and her pillow was wet with
tears; for Aunt Maria was dead, had died too soon to hear of her grand-
niece's experiences at Newnham, to which she had looked forward with
such interest, but not before evoking a real love and gratitude in
Darsie's heart.  How thankful the girl was to remember that she had been
able to cheer the last year of that lonely life, to recall every loving
word and action, every tiny scrap of self-denial on her own part which
had repaid in some small way the great gift to herself.  Thankful and
grateful she would be to the end of her life, but she was not, and had
not even pretended to be, _sorry_ that Aunt Maria was dead.

"She was old, and she was lonely, and she was ill.  I'm _glad_, not
sorry," she had declared to the scandalised Lavender.  "I'm glad she'll
never come hobbling downstairs again, and sit all the long, long day in
one chair, waiting for it to end.  I'm _glad_ she's forgotten all about
her back, and her feet, and her head, and her joints, and all the
thousand parts that ached, and could not rest.  I'm _glad_ she doesn't
need any more spectacles, and sticks, and false teeth, nor to have
people shouting into her ear to make her hear.  I'm thankful!  If I'd
hated her I might have liked her to live on here, but I loved her, so
I'm glad.  She has gone somewhere else, where she is happy, and
cheerful, and _whole_, and I hope her husband has met her, and that they
are having a lovely, lovely time together..."

Darsie was glad, too, in quite an open, unconcealed fashion, when a
legacy of a few thousand pounds lifted a little of the strain from her
father's busy shoulders, made it possible to send Harry and Russell to a
good boarding-school, continue Clemence's beloved music lessons, and
provide many needfuls for household use.  It was not only pleasant but
absolutely thrilling to know that as long as she herself lived she
would, in addition, possess fifty pounds a year--practically a pound a
week--of her very, very own, so that even when she grew too old to
teach, she could retire to a tiny cottage in the country, and live the
simple life.  In the meantime, however, she was young, and life
stretched ahead full of delicious possibilities and excitements.

Her great ambition had been achieved.  She was a student at Cambridge;
the historic colleges whose names had so long been familiar on her lips
lay but a few streets away, while in her own college, close at hand,
along the very same corridor, lay other girls with whom she must work,
with whom she must play, whose lives must of a surety touch her own.

What would happen?  How would she fare?  When the last night of her
three-years course arrived, and she lay as now in this narrow white bed,
staring across the darkened room which had been her home, what would her
dreams be then?  What pictures would arise in the gallery of her mind?
What faces smile at her out of the mist?

"Oh, God," sighed Darsie in a soft, involuntary appeal, "help me to be
good!"



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE AUCTION.

The next day Darsie and Hannah were interviewed by their several
coaches, male and female, received instructions as to their future work,
and had the excitement of witnessing the return of the second and third
year girls, whose manner was strikingly different from that of the
modest Freshers.  Dinner that evening was more of an ordeal than ever,
with a galaxy of such assured, not to say aggressive, young women,
staring with all their eyes at their new companions, and, to judge from
the expressions on their faces, forming the meanest opinion of their
intelligence!

Hannah Vernon was of all the Freshers the least upset by their scrutiny,
but then plain Hannah was proverbially thick-skinned about the opinion
of others.

"Let 'em stare if it amuses 'em--_I_ don't mind!  Long time since I've
been so much admired," she returned composedly to Darsie's indignant
whisper.  "Every dog has its day.  Wait till it's _our_ turn!  I'll wear
specs for that day--if I never do again, and glare over them like our
friend in green.  I've been taking notes, and her glare is worth all the
rest put together.  I feel sure she sees into my pocket, and knows
exactly how much there is in my purse.  Perhaps she's jealous of you.
You're the prettiest girl here--old or new!"

"Oh, am I?  _Nice_!" cried Darsie, dimpling.  She peered around the
tables, examining the faces of the girls within sight with an appraising
eye, compared them with the reflection which looked back at her out of
her own mirror, and felt an agreeable sense of conviction.  There was
one slim, dark-eyed girl with a bright rose flush on her cheeks, as to
whose claim she felt a moment's uncertainty, but when she turned her
head--lo, a nose was revealed soaring so unbecomingly skyward that
Darsie breathed again.  Yes! she was the prettiest.  Now if she could
just manage to be the most popular also, and, not the cleverest, of
course--that was _too_ much to expect--but well in the front rank, how
agreeable it would be, to be sure!

The dining-hall looked much more cheery tonight, when the long table was
surrounded by over sixty students in their brightly coloured dresses;
the buzz of conversation rose steadily throughout the meal, and by the
time that coffee was served curiosity seemed satisfied, for the staring
had come to an end.

"I think you must be Dan Vernon's sister.  May I introduce myself?  I am
Helen Ross."  A tall girl, with brown hair brushed low over her ears,
stood beside Hannah's chair, holding out her hand with an air of
assurance which plainly intimated that the mention of her name was
expected to arouse instant recognition.  Hannah, who had never heard it
before, and was not skilled in the art of pretence, stared back in blank
surprise.

"Oh-h!  Really?  Yes, I'm Hannah Vernon.  This is my friend Miss
Garnett."

Helen Ross nicked her eyelashes at Darsie by way of a bow, but bestowed
no spoken greeting.

"Rather beastly, the first day, isn't it?" she drawled, turning to
Hannah once more.  "Feel such a pelican in the wilderness, wandering
about, not knowing what to be after next.  Make me useful, do!  I'd like
to be useful.  Told your brother I'd show you the ropes.  Did you get
your milk last night?  Half a pint each is your allowance.  You get it
from the pantry directly after dinner, and take it upstairs for cocoa.
Have you discovered your gyp-room yet?"

Hannah stolidly shook her head, whereupon Miss Ross proceeded to further
explanations.  The gyp-room was a species of pantry, one of which was to
be found on each corridor, whence cups, saucers, and other utensils for
the preparation of the famous ten o'clock "cocoas" could be obtained.
You helped yourself, don't you know, and you took the things back when
you had done with them, but you didn't wash them up.  The gyp-room owned
a presiding dignitary of its own who was known as the "gyp-woman," who
obligingly performed that service.  Then Miss Ross expressed a wish to
see Hannah's room, and the three girls ascended the stairs together, and
the two Freshers stood by meekly while the two-year girl indulged in
candid criticism.

"Humph!  Not so bad.  Rather a barn at present, but it'll look all right
when you've fixed it up.  Always takes a few days to settle down, but
one lives in one's room so much that it's worth taking pains.  You can
get no end into the coffin, that's one blessing!"

"Coffin!"  Hannah and Darsie jerked at the ominous word, whereupon Miss
Ross smiled with complacent superiority.

"Ah! of course, you don't know that name.  The chest's the `coffin,' and
you keep hats in it, likewise odd boxes, and evening cloaks, and other
perishable splendours.  Every one calls them coffins, so you'll have to
get used to it, I'm afraid; and the bureau's a `burry,' and the screen's
a `farce,' and a topply one at that.  You'll have to buy another to take
its place.  They never _do_ supply you with decent screens.  By the way,
there's an auction on to-night!  Did any one tell you?  That's your
chance of picking up the things you want.  It's held in the Gym. at ten
o'clock, and is not bad fun.  I'll come along and take you, if you'd
care to go."

"Thanks.  Yes, I'd like to see everything that's going on.  What sort of
things are for sale?"

"All sorts of discards that have been left behind by other girls--
screens, bed-covers, curtains, china flower-pots, chairs, kettles,
pictures.  Sometimes there's quite a fine show."

"Sounds attractive!  And who is the auctioneer?"

"A second-year girl--the one who is credited with the greatest amount of
wit."

There was a moment's silence while the two Freshers each mentally leaped
a year ahead, and saw herself in this proud and enviable position.

"Who's the one to-night?"

"Margaret France."  Miss Ross's lips curled expressively.  "I hope you
won't judge us by her standard.  She's certainly not the one whom _I_
should have chosen to fill the position!"

Silence again, while the Freshers reflected that they knew very well
whom Miss Helen Ross would have chosen if she had had the chance, and
were glad that she hadn't.

"Well, I'll call round about ten.  Make up your fire, and be
comfortable.  You're allowed a scuttle of coals a day, and let me warn
you to _use_ it!  If it's not all burnt, keep a few lumps in a
convenient cache--a box under the bed will do.  It comes in handy for
another day, and when it gets really cold you can stoke up at night and
have a fire to dress by in the morning.  The authorities don't approve
of that--they say it's bad for the stoves.  Personally I consider myself
before any stoves."

She nodded casually and strode from the room, leaving the two friends
divided between gratitude for her kindness and prejudice against her
personality.

"Don't like her a bit, do you?"

"Humph.  So-so!  Means well, I think.  Wonder how she knows Dan?  He
never mentioned her name."

"Not at _all_ the sort of girl Dan would care for!  Such a bumptious
manner.  A good many of them have, I observe.  Fearfully self-possessed.
Perhaps it's a special effort to impress the Freshers.  She didn't take
much notice of me, but I'm coming with you all the same to buy fixings
for my room, and hear the second-year auctioneer.  Call for me when
you're ready, like a dear.  I'm off now to read until ten o'clock."

Darsie shut herself in her room, and set to work at her burry with all
the ardour of a beginner, so that the hour and a half passed like a
flash, and it seemed as if she had scarcely begun before Hannah's solid
bang sounded at the door, and she went out into the corridor to follow
Helen Ross to the Gym.

The auction had already begun, and the auctioneer, a fresh-looking girl
with grey eyes planted extraordinarily far apart, was engaged in
extolling the excellencies of an aged kettle to a laughing circle of
girls.  She wore a black dress cut square at the neck, and a rose-
coloured ribbon twined round her head.  She held out the kettle at the
length of a bare white arm, and raised her clear voice in delightful
imitation of the professional wheedle.

"Friends and Freshers!  We now come to Lot Three, one of the most
striking and interesting on the catalogue.  A kettle, ladies, is always
a useful article, but this is no ordinary kettle.  We have it on
unimpeachable authority that this kettle was the kettle in residence at
the establishment of our late colleague Miss Constantia Lawson, the
Senior Classic of her year!  The kettle of a Senior Classic, Freshers!
The kettle which has ministered to her refreshment, which has been, in
the language of the poem, the fount of her inspiration!  What price
shall I say, ladies, for the kettle of a Senior Classic?  Sixpence!  Did
somebody say sixpence!  _For the kettle of a Senior Classic_!
Eightpence!  Thank you, madam.  For the kettle of a-- What advance on
eightpence?  Freshers would do well to consider this opportunity before
it is too late.  What an--an _inebriating_ effect, if I may use the word
without offence to the late lamented poet, would be added to the cup
that cheers by the thought that the same handle, the same spout, the
same--er--er--furry deposit in the inside, have ministered to the
refreshment of one of the master spirits of our day!  Going at
eightpence--eightpence-halfpenny--I thank you, madam!  At tenpence!  No
advance on tenpence?  Going--going--_gone_!"

The hammer descended with a rap, the auctioneer leaned back with an air
of exhaustion, and handed the kettle to her clerk, in blue silk and
crystal beads.

"Lady to the right.  Tell the lady, Joshua, that the small hole in the
bottom can easily be soldered by an obliging ironmonger, or, if she
prefers, she can hang the kettle on the wall as an object of vertu!"

Peals of laughter greeted this tragic disclosure.  The lady to the right
refused for some minutes to hand over her tenpence, but finally
succumbed to the feeling of the meeting, when a crumpled cotton bed-
cover was next produced for sale.

"Lot Four.  Handsome Oriental bedspread--design of peacocks, vultures,
and pear-trees, in gorgeous colourings.  Encircling border on a
background of blizzard white, and corner pieces complete.  Eight feet by
three.  Joshua! carry the bedspread round and allow the ladies to
examine it for themselves.  It is excessively hurtful to our feelings
when purchasers imply that deception has been practised in order to
induce them to purchase our goods.  Show the ladies the spread!  Pure
cotton, ladies.  Fast colours.  Design by Alma Tadema, in his happiest
mood.  You could not possibly purchase such a spread in any
establishment, ladies, under the sum of two-and-six.  Fine Oriental
goods, warranted to impart an air of opulence to the humblest bedstead.
Any Fresher wishing to give the last touch of costly elegance to her
room should not neglect this opportunity.  What am I to say, ladies, for
this handsome spread?  Sixpence again!  Thank you, madam!  Sixpences
seem in the ascendant to-night.  Let us hope the collections on Sunday
next will benefit from the ensuing dearth.  Ninepence!  _At_ ninepence.
Pardon, madam?  The lady in the eyeglasses wishes to make a remark,
Joshua.  The lady in the eyeglasses remarks that one side of the spread
has been torn.  The lady is evidently unaware that that fact is a proof
positive of the authenticity of the spread.  No Eastern article, as all
travellers are aware, is _ever_ even at both sides."  Another burst of
laughter greeted this point.  The auctioneer showed her pretty white
teeth in a complacent smile, her wide grey eyes roved round the room,
and met Darsie's eyes raised to her in beaming admiration.

"One-and-six did you say, madam?" she cried instantly.  "Did I
understand you to say one-and-six?  The opportunity will never occur
again.  At one-and-six for the lady in violet.  Take the name and
address if you please, Joshua."  And Darsie, with a shrug and a laugh,
paid out her one-and-six, and received in return the blizzard-white
cover, ornamented with a roughly mended tear all along one side.

The next articles offered for sale were framed pictures of various sizes
which had evidently not been considered worth the trouble of removing.
Water-colour sketches by 'prentice hands, faded photographs, or pretty-
pretty prints evidently torn from the pages of magazines.  The
auctioneer exerted all the blandishments to induce the Freshers to
purchase these masterpieces, and deplored their scant response with
pathetic reproaches.

"_No_ bids for this tasty little picture?  Ladies, ladies, this is a
great mistake!  In the midst of your arduous brain toil, what could be
more soothing and refreshing than to gaze upon this charming pastoral
scene?  This azure earth, this verdant sky, this lovely maid who
combined in her person all the simpering charms of youth, and never, for
one misguided moment, troubled her ochre head over the acquirement of
that higher knowledge which, as we all know, is the proud prerogative of
man!  What price shall I say for `The Maiden's Dream'?  _No_ bids!  Put
it down if you please, Joshua.  We have no art collectors with us to-
night.  Let me have the Botticelli for a change."

The clerk in blue silk handed up another picture in a rickety Oxford
frame, at which the auctioneer gazed rapturously for several moments
before turning it towards her audience.

"Number Six on the catalogue.  Genuine photograph of a Botticelli from
the collection of Miss Eva Dalgleish.  Attention, Freshers, if you
please!  This is an item of serious importance.  The presence of a
Botticelli bestows at once the air of culture and refinement without
which no study is worthy of the name.  A genuine photograph of a
Botticelli, purchased by the owner in the Italian city of Florence, and
borne home by her own fair hands, as the crack across the corner will
give proof.  In an Oxford frame--a compliment to our sister University--
glazed and complete, with hanging loops and fragment of wire.  _What_
offers for the Botticelli?  Any Fresher who wishes to prove herself
endowed with refined and artistic--One shilling?  Thank you, madam.
_And_ sixpence!  One and nine.  One and nine for this genuine
Botticelli.  Ladies, ladies, this is a sad day for Newnham.  And nine--
and nine.  Going.  Going--_gone_!"

It was Hannah who had testified to her own artistic qualities by
purchasing this photograph.  She tucked it proudly under her arm, and
turned an envious eye on a brass flower-pot which was now engaging the
auctioneer's attention.  A simultaneous movement of the audience showed
that this was an article on which many hopes had been set, and bidding
promised to be brisk.

"Now, ladies, we come to one of the principal events of the evening, the
bidding for this very rich and magnificent brass, hand-beaten, richly-
chased, Oriental, ornamental flower-pot.  We have several flower-pots in
our catalogue, but none to be compared for one moment to the very
superior article which you now see before you.  It is safe to say that
no student, even in her third year, can boast of a flower-pot to equal
this lot in either quality or design.  The possession of it will in
itself ensure fame for its fortunate owner.  Let me have a handsome bid,
if you please, ladies, to start this valuable article.  Half a crown!!!
A lady, whose ignorance we can only deplore, offers me half a crown for
a genuine antique brass!  I am thankful that in such a large and
enlightened audience such an error is not likely to be repeated.  Three
shillings.  _Thank_ you, madam.  And six.  Four shillings--four
shillings.  Freshers who neglect to take advantage of this opportunity
will be compelled to content themselves with one of these common china
articles to my left.  A flowerpot is a necessary article of furniture
without which no room is complete.  What is home without an aspidistra?
You laugh, ladies, but you can find no answer to that question.  And
six!  Five shillings!  The raw material for this masterpiece must have
cost many times this sum.  Five--five--no advance on five.  The lady in
green, Joshua.  Take the lady's address!"

The auctioneer put up her hand to her head and patted the rose-coloured
ribbon into place.  Inspired by the laughing appreciation of her
sallies, her cheeks had flushed to the same bright shade, and with her
sparkling eyes and alert, graceful movements she made a delightful and
attractive figure, at which the Freshers stared in undisguised delight.

"I adore her!" whispered Darsie in her friend's ear.

"Decent sort!" croaked Hannah the undemonstrative, and then by a common
impulse their glance passed on to rest on Helen Ross's set, supercilious
face.

"I loathe her," came the second whisper.

"Mean thing--jealousy!" croaked Hannah once more, and turned her
attention to the business in hand.

After the china flower-pots had been disposed of, a trio of basket-
chairs gave an impetus to the bidding, as the truth of the auctioneer's
words went home to every heart.

"`Three luxurious basket-chairs, cushioned complete in handsome
cretonne, stuffed pure wool.  Condition--as new.'  Ladies, in these
basket-chairs you see not only elegant articles of furniture, but a
solution of the dilemma which dogs every owner of a one-comfortable-
chair study.  One question haunts her waking and sleeping hours; one
problem embitters the most social occasions--`_Shall I be comfortable or
polite_?'  To this question, in this college of Newnham, there can,
ladies, be but one reply--and the wretched hostess sits on the coal-box
and gives her visitor the chair.  After long hours of mental toil, after
the physical strain of the hockey-field, a quiet hour is vouchsafed
beside her own fireside, with the companionship of a beloved friend to
soothe and cheer, and that hour, ladies--that precious hour--I say it
with emotion almost too strong for words--that stolen hour of peace and
rest must needs be passed--_on the coal-box_!  Ladies, I need say no
more.  The remedy is in your own hands."

So on, and so on.  After the chairs came curtains; after the curtains,
bookcases, ornaments, and books.  The auction flowed on, punctuated by
explosions of laughter, until the last item on the "catalogue" was
reached, and the auctioneer was crimson with exhaustion.

Darsie and Hannah had amassed between them quite a stock of furnishings.
A screen apiece, chairs, Oriental window-curtains in stripes of
contrasting colours warm and comfortable to look upon, flower-pots, and
odd pictures and ornaments.  One felt a proprietor, indeed, as one
looked over the spoils, and the inroads into capital had been agreeably
small.  Darsie was folding up her damaged "spread" when a voice spoke in
her ear, and with a little jump of the heart she looked up to find
Margaret France standing by her side.

"How do you do?  I must thank you for your patronage.  You chipped in
nobly.  Hope you'll like 'em, when you've got 'em.  Just up, aren't you?
What's your shop?"

For a moment Darsie stared blankly, then a flash of intuition revealed
the meaning of the word.

"Modern languages."

"Good!  So'm I.  And your friend?"

"Mathematics."

"Humph!  Well, good luck!  I'm off to bed.  We shall meet on the
Rialto!"

She smiled, nodded, and was gone.  With a sudden realisation of their
own fatigue the Freshers turned to follow her example.  Helen Ross
joined them on their way along the corridors, and Darsie could not
resist expressing her appreciation of the auctioneer's wit.

"She was delicious.  I _have_ enjoyed it.  She _is_ amusing and clever."

"Think so?" said Helen coolly.  "Really?  Glad you were pleased.  It's
usually _far_ better than that!"

With a curt good-night she turned into her own room, and the two friends
made haste to follow her example.

The banked-up fires burned warm and red; the scattered oddments had been
hidden from sight in the "coffin's" rapacious maw; photographs and
knick-knacks gave a homy look to the rooms which had looked so bare and
bleak twenty-four hours before.  The Freshers tumbled into bed and fell
happily asleep.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

FIRST EXPERIENCES.

During the first month at Newnham Darsie and Hannah fell gradually and
happily into the routine of college life.  They grew to recognise their
companions by name, and to place them according to their several
"shops"; they entertained cocoa parties in their rooms; picked up slang
terms, and talked condescendingly of "townees"; they paid up
subscriptions to "Hall," "Games," "Flowers," and "Fic"; slept, played,
and laughed and talked, and, above all, _worked_, with heart and mind,
and with every day that passed were more convinced that to be a student
at Cambridge was the most glorious fate that any girl could desire.

A week after the beginning of term Helen Ross, the fortunate possessor
of a double room, gave a tea-party, with one of the younger Dons as
chaperon, to which Dan Vernon and a companion were invited.  Ostensibly
the party was given in Hannah's honour, but to her astonishment and
dismay Hannah's friend was not favoured with an invitation, and felt her
first real twinge of loneliness in the knowledge that two old friends
were making merry together but a few yards away, while she sat solitary
and alone.  What she had done to incur Helen Ross's dislike Darsie could
not imagine, and, fortunately for herself, she was too large-hearted to
suspect that it arose simply from an unattractive girl's jealousy of one
whom all had combined to love and admire.  Be that as it may, Darsie was
left out of the tea-party, and her subsequent cross-questionings of
Hannah were far from comforting.

"Had a good time?"

"Top hole."

"Nice people there?"

"Topping."

"Good cakes?"

"Scrum!"

"Dan ask for me?"

"No."

"Then he ought to have done!"  Darsie told herself indignantly, and her
thoughts flew off to Ralph Percival, wondering when she would see him
next, and recalling with pleasure his promise to "see her through."

The approach of the Freshers' hockey match banished less important
topics, for Hannah was on edge with anxiety to be at her best, and
disport herself sufficiently well to be included in after-team
practices, while Darsie was scarcely less eager on her behalf.

When the afternoon arrived and the match began, the second and third
year girls crowded to look on, while the Captain stood apart surrounded
by a few satellites from the Committee, as truly the monarch of all she
surveyed as any king who ever graced a throne.  The thoughts of each
Fresher turned with an anguish of appeal towards this figure; a smile on
her face raised them to the seventh heaven; a frown laid them in the
dust!  Extraordinary to think that two short years ago this oracle had
been a Fresher like themselves!  Inconceivable to imagine that in two
years to come they themselves might occupy that same magnificent
altitude!

The eyes of the Oracle fell upon Hannah and approved what she saw, and
henceforth Hannah took part in team practices, and lorded it over
Darsie, who in her turn affected a growing antagonism to the game.

"You can have too much of a good thing--even of games--and I seem to
have _eaten_ hockey every meal since I arrived!" she announced
impatiently; and in truth, since an unwritten law forbade the discussion
of "shop" at table, the conversation was largely limited to
dissertations on this the most popular of games.

On Sundays the two girls went together to King's College Chapel and
gazed with admiration at the vaulted stone roof, with its marvellous fan
tracery; at its towering stained-glass windows, and the screen bearing
the monogram of Anne Boleyn; at the delicate carving of the stalls.  It
was so wonderfully different from the dreary town edifice in which they
had been accustomed to worship, with its painted walls, heavy gallery,
and wheezy organ played by an indifferent musician--so wonderfully,
gloriously different that Darsie felt a pricking at the back of her eyes
as though she were ready to cry for sheer pleasure and admiration.  The
music and the sermon seemed alike perfect, and Darsie ardently followed
each stage of the service.

Some people are inclined to grow frivolous and forgetful when the world
goes well with them and the desire of their hearts is accomplished;
others are filled with a passion of gratitude and thanksgiving, and
Darsie Garnett belonged to the latter category.  Prosperity made her
more humble, more kindly, more overflowing with love to God and man.  A
portrait of Lady Hayes stood on her study mantelpiece, and every morning
and evening she bent her sunny head to kiss the stern old face.  Dear
old Aunt Maria! she had so loved being kissed--_really_ kissed, as if
one meant it.  If in that higher life to which she had gone she knew
what was happening on earth, Darsie felt sure that she would like to
know that her portrait was still cherished.  Her thoughts hovered
gratefully about the dead woman as she sat in this wonderful old church,
and pictured with awe the succeeding generations who had worshipped
within its walls.  It was only when the sermon was at an end that,
turning her head, Darsie met the gaze of a girl sitting a few seats
away, and after a moment of bewilderment recognised the widely set eyes
and curling lips of Margaret France.

In her dark hat and coat she looked less attractive than in evening
dress, but the fact made no difference in the thrill of pleasure with
which Darsie realised her presence.  Some quality in this girl appealed
to the deep places of her heart; she realised instinctively that if the
attraction were mutual the tie between them would be close and firm, but
it must be all or nothing--she could never dally with friendship with
Margaret France!

Walking home slowly along Silver Street, she found herself answering
absently to Hannah's remarks, her whole attention riveted on watching
the passers-by, wondering if by any possibility Margaret France would
stop to speak to her once more, and her heart leaped with exultation as
a footstep paused by her side, and the clear, crisp tones addressed her
by name.

"Morning, Miss Garnett!  Morning, Miss Vernon!  Ripping day, isn't it?
Glad to see you in King's.  Saw you long before you spotted me, and
enjoyed your enjoyment.  Never forgot my first services.  Good to be
there, isn't it?"

"Oh-h!"  Darsie's deep-drawn breath of rapture was an eloquent response.
"I _have_ been happy!  I've never in my life seen anything so wonderful
before.  It seems almost too good to be true that I can go there every
Sunday for years to come.  Cambridge is wonderful.  I am more enchanted
every day.  Even to walk along the streets is a joy."

"Good!" cried Margaret heartily.  "Drop in to five o'clock service
sometimes when you're feeling tired, and tied up with your work.  It's a
grand soother.  How goes the work so far?  Enjoying the lectures?
Finding the literature interesting?"

The two Modern Languages discussed work together eagerly, while
mathematical Hannah marched on a few feet ahead.  Darsie felt a pang of
remorse, because she could not help wishing that she would _stay_ ahead,
and so give the chance of a prolonged _tete-a-tete_ with Margaret
France.  The feeling of attraction was so strong now that they were face
to face that it was only by an effort of will that she could resist
slipping her hand through the black serge arm, but the expression of her
face was eloquent, and Margaret smiled back well pleased.  When they
parted a few minutes later to go to their different halls, the older
girl said casually, but in a lowered voice which showed that the
invitation was meant for Darsie alone--

"By the way, I'm at home for cocoa on Tuesday evenings at ten.  Bring
your milk, and come along, will you!  I'd like to have you."

"Rather!" cried Darsie eloquently, and ran up to her room aglow with
delight and pride, which grew still deeper at lunch when a casual
reference to the invitation (it was really impossible to keep silent on
so thrilling a point!) evoked a wide stare of surprise.

"To her Tuesdays!  Are you sure?  Nobody goes to those but her very boon
companions.  You _are_ honoured!"

"Didn't ask _me_, I notice!" sniffed Hannah huffily.  "No twin soul
here.  Recognised an affinity in you, I suppose."

"Well, _I_ wasn't asked to play in team matches!  Don't grudge me my
little score!" returned Darsie, knowing well that an honour in sport was
more to her companion than many cocoas.  "Besides, you must remember you
have Helen Ross!"

"Oh, ah, yes!  Helen Ross dotes on me.  Disinterested, of course.  No
connection with the brother over the way!" commented Hannah with a grin.
"By the way, I hear from Dan that your friend Ralph Percival is in
trouble already, playing cards, getting into debt, and staying out after
hours.  Seems to be a poor-spirited sort of fellow from all accounts!"

"He saved my life, anyway, when I was a youngster, and very nearly
drowned myself, paddling up a mill-stream.  There's no want of spirit
about Ralph.  Life has been made too easy for him, that's the mischief!"
said Darsie in her most elderly and judicial manner.  "It's difficult to
keep to the grind when you know that you will never need to work.  He
needs an object in life.  Until he finds that, he will be content to
drift."

"He'll drift into being sent down at this rate.  That will be the end of
him!" croaked Hannah gloomily; whereupon Darsie knitted her brows and
collapsed into silence for the rest of the meal.

Poor, dear, handsome Ralph!  At the bottom of her heart Darsie was
hardly surprised to hear Hannah's report.  The indifference with which
he had entered upon his college life had not developed into any more
earnest spirit, as had been abundantly proved by his conversation when
the two had last met, during the long vacation, while the hesitating
manner of his mother and sisters seemed to hint at a hidden anxiety.  In
the depths of her heart Darsie was feeling considerably piqued by the
fact that though she had now been over a month in Cambridge Ralph had
shown no anxiety to meet her, or to fulfil his promise of "showing the
ropes."  Other girls had been invited to merry tea-parties in the
different colleges, and almost daily she had expected such an invitation
for herself, but neither of her two men friends had paid her this mark
of attention; but for the fact of an occasional meeting in the streets
they might as well have been at the other end of the land.  Pride
forbade her commenting on the fact even to Hannah; but inwardly she had
determined to be very proud and haughty when the deferred meeting came
about.  Dan was too wrapped up in himself to care for outsiders; Ralph
was a slacker--not worth a thought.  Darsie dismissed them both with a
shrug.  Margaret France was worth a dozen men put together!

Ten o'clock on Tuesday evening seemed long in coming, but the moment
that the clock pointed to the hour Darsie hastened to her new friend's
study, and to her satisfaction found her still alone.  The room looked
delightfully cosy with pink shades over the lights, a clear blaze upon
the grate, and Margaret herself, in a pink rest-gown curled up in a
wicker-chair, was the very embodiment of ease.  She did not rise as
Darsie entered, but pointed to a chair close at hand, with an eagerness
which was in itself the best welcome.

"That's right.  Come along!  I'm glad you're the first.  Sit down and
look around.  How do you like my den?"

Darsie stared to right and left with curious eyes, and came to the
instant conclusion that Margaret's room was like herself.  From floor to
ceiling, from window to door, there was not one single article which did
not give back a cheering impression.  If the article were composed of
metal, it shone and glittered until it could shine no farther; if of
oak, every leaf and moulding spoke of elbow-grease, and clean, fresh-
smelling polish; if it were a fabric of wool or cotton, it was
invariably of some shade of rose, shedding, as it were, an aspect of
summer in the midst of November gloom.

Over the fireplace was fastened a long brown-paper scroll, on which some
words were painted in big ornamental letters.  Darsie read them with a
thrill of appreciation--

  "Two men looked out through prison bars,
  One saw mud, the other stars!"

The eyes of the two girls met, and lingered.  Then Darsie spoke--

"That's your motto in life!  You look out for stars--"

"Yes!  So do you.  That's why I wanted to be friends."

"I wonder!" mused Darsie, and sat silent, gazing into the fire.  "It is
beautiful, and I understand the drift, but--would you mind paraphrasing
it for my benefit?"

"It's so simple.  There _is_ mud, and there _are_ stars.  It's just a
choice of where we choose to look."

"Yes--I see.  But don't you think there are times--when one is awfully
down on one's luck, for instance--when there's no one on earth so trying
as the persistent optimist who _will_ make the best of everything, and
take a cheerful view!  You want to murder him in cold blood.  I do, at
least.  You feel ever so much more cheered by some one who acknowledges
the mud, and says how horrid it is, and pities you for sticking so
fast!"

Margaret's ringing laugh showed all her pretty white teeth.  She rubbed
her hands together in delighted appreciation.

"Oh, I know, I know!  I want to kill them, too.  Vision's not a mite of
use without tact.  But no bars can shut out the stars if we choose to
let them shine."

Her own face was ashine as she spoke, but anything more unlike
"goodiness," abhorred by every normal girl, it would be impossible to
imagine.

"Tell me about your work--how do you get on with your coach?" she asked
the next moment, switching off to ordinary subjects in the most easy and
natural of manners, and Darsie found herself laying bare all the little
hitches and difficulties which must needs enter into even the most
congenial course of study, and being alternately laughed at and
consoled, and directed towards a solution by brisk, apt words.

"You're all right--you've got a head.  You'll come through on top, if
you'll be content to go slow.  Want to take the Tripos first year, and
honours at that--that's your style!  Calm down, my dear, and be content
to jog.  It pays better in the end."  She flashed a radiant smile at
Darsie's reddening face, then jumped up to greet her other guests of the
evening, three in number, who appeared at that moment, each carrying her
own precious portion of milk.

One was "Economics" and owned so square a jaw that the line of it (there
was no curve) seemed to run down straight with the ear; another was
"Science" and wore spectacles; a third was "Modern Languages," like the
host, but one and all shared an apparently unlimited appetite for Cocoa,
Conversation, and Chelsea buns, the which they proceeded to enjoy to the
full.  "Modern Languages" being in the ascendant, indulged in a little
"shop" as a preliminary, accompanied by the sighs, groans, and
complaints incidental to the subject.

"How's your drama getting on?  Is it developing satisfactorily?"
Student Number Two inquired of Darsie, in reference to the paper given
out at the last lecture in Divinity Hall, and Darsie shrugged with a
plaintive air.

"I've been struggling to develop it, to _trace_ its development, as he
said; but the tracings are decidedly dim!  I get on much better with a
subject on which I can throw a little imagination.  `The growth of the
novel,' for instance--I wove quite a fairy-tale out of that."

The girls smiled, but with a dubious air.

"Better be careful!  That's a ruse which most of us have tried in our
day, and come wearily back to sober fact...  How do you like the
Historical French Grammar?"

The Fresher made a gesture as if to tear her hair, whereupon the second-
year girls groaned in chorus.

"Hopeless!  Piteous!  In last year's Tripos the paper was positively
inhuman.  The girls said it was impossible even to understand the
questions, much less to answer them."

"Wicked!  Waste of time, I call it.  Most of us are training to teach,
but it's not one in a hundred who will be called upon to teach _that_
erudite horror."

Darsie looked at Margaret France as she spoke, and saw at once by the
expression of her companions that she had touched on a delicate subject.
There was a moment's silence, then--

"I am not going to teach," said Margaret, smiling.

"Really!  Then-- What are you going to do?"

"Live at home."

A future profession seemed so universal a prospect with the Newnham
students that Margaret's reply amazed Darsie as much as it appeared to
annoy her other hearers.

Economics sniffed, and muttered beneath her breath; Science stared
fixedly at the ceiling through her glittering spectacles; Modern
Languages groaned aloud.

"With your brain!  With your spirit!  After this training!  Such wicked
waste..."

Margaret laughed lightly.

"Oh, Darsie Garnett, how mean of you, when I feed you with my best
Chelsea buns, to land me in this time-honoured discussion!  I'm an only
child, and my parents have been perfect bricks in giving me my wish and
sparing me for three whole years!  The least I can do is to go home and
do a turn for them.  I fail to see where the waste comes in!"

"All you have learned--all you have studied--all you have read--"

"Just so!  I hope it will make me a more interesting companion for them.
And for myself!  I've got to live with myself all the days of my life,
remember, and I do _not_ wish to be bored!"

"You have such power, such capacity!  You might do some work for the
world!"

"I intend to.  What's the world made up of, after all, but a number of
separate homes?  As a matter of ordinary common sense isn't it best to
work in one's _own_ home, rather than in a strange one?"

Margaret threw out her hands with a pretty appealing gesture, and her
companions stared at her in silence, apparently too nonplussed to reply.
Before they had time to rally to the attack, however, a startling
interruption had occurred.

With a suddenness and violence which made the cocoa-drinkers jump in
their seats the door burst open, and the figure of a girl in evening
dress precipitated herself into their midst.  Her light skirt was thrown
over her shoulders, revealing an abbreviated white petticoat; her eyes
were fixed with a deadly determination; regardless of the occupants of
the room or of the articles of furniture scattered here and there, she
flew at lightning speed to the window, closed it with a resounding bang,
leaped like a cat at the ventilator overhead, banged that also, and with
one bound was out of the room, the door making a third bang in her wake.

Darsie gasped in dismay.  She herself had been transfixed with
astonishment, but her companions had displayed a marvellous self-
possession.  Margaret had wrapped her arms round the cocoa-table to
protect it from upset, another girl had steadied the screen, a third had
obligingly lifted her chair out of the way; but no sign of alarm or
curiosity showed upon their faces, which fact did but heighten the
mystery of the situation.

"Is she--is she _mad_?"

The second-year girls laughed in chorus.  From afar could be heard a
succession of bang, bang, bangs, as if in every study in the house the
same performance was being enacted.  Margaret nodded at the Fresher with
kindly reassurance.

"Only the fire drill!  They've had an alarm, and she's told to shut off
draughts.  Very good going!  Not more than five or six seconds all
told!"

"There isn't really--"

"Oh, dear, no.  No such luck!  Poor fun having a fire brigade, and no
chance to show its mettle.  But we live in hope.  You ought to join.  I
can imagine you making a magnificent captain."

So here was another ambition.  Darsie made a mental note to inquire into
the workings of the fire brigade, and to offer her name as a recruit
without delay.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE FANCY BALL.

It was somewhat of a shock to the Fresher contingency to receive one
morning the intimation of a Costume Ball, to be held in Clough Hall on
the following night; but their protests met with scant sympathy from the
elders.  When Darsie plaintively declared that she hadn't got a fancy
dress, and would not have time to send home for it if she _had_, a
third-year girl silenced her by a stern counter-question: "And where,
pray, would be the fun if you _had_, and _could_?  If at the cost of a
postcard you could be fitted up as the Lady of the Lake in green
draperies and water-lilies, it would no doubt be exceedingly becoming,
but it would be no sport.  No, young woman, you've got to contrive
something out of nothing and an hour stolen from the night, and when
you've done it you'll be in the mood to appreciate other people's
contrivings into the bargain.  Buck up!  You're one of the dressy sort.
We'll expect wonders from you."

But when Darsie repaired to the seclusion of her study and set herself
to the problem of evolving a fancy dress out of an ordinary college
outfit, ideas were remarkably slow in coming.  She looked questioningly
at each piece of drapery in turns, wondered if she could be a ghost in
curtains, a statue in sheets, an eastern houri in the cotton quilt, a
Portia in the hearthrug, discarded each possibility in turn, and turned
her attention to her own wardrobe.

Black serge, grey tweed, violet ninon; two evening frocks, and the one
white satin which was the _piece de resistance_ of the whole.  A cloth
coat, a mackintosh, an art serge cloak for evening wear--how _could_ one
manufacture a fancy dress from garments so ordinary as these?

In despair, Darsie betook herself to Margaret France's room and found
that young woman seated before her dressing-table engaged in staring
fixedly at her own reflection in the mirror.  She betrayed no
embarrassment at being discovered in so compromising a position, but
smiled a broad smile of welcome out of the mirror, the while she
continued to turn and to twist, and hold up a hand-glass to scrutinise
more closely unknown aspects of face and head.

"I know what you've come for!  I've had two Freshers already.  Bowled
over at the thought of inventing a costume--that's it, isn't it?  Oh,
you'll rise to it yet.  The only difficulty is to hit on an idea--the
rest's as easy as pie.  That's what I'm doing now--studying my phiz to
see what it suggests.  My nose, now!  What d'you think of my nose?
Seems to me that nose wasn't given me for nothing.  _And_ the width
between the eyes!  It's borne in upon me that I must be either a turnip
lantern or a Dutch doll.  The doll would probably be the most becoming,
so I'll plump for that.  Don't breathe a word, for it must be a secret
to the last.  As for you--it would be easy to suggest a dozen pretty-
pretties."

Margaret wheeled round in her chair, and sat nursing her knees,
regarding Darsie with a twinkling eye.  "Big eyes, long neck, neat
little feet--you'd make an adorable Alice in Wonderland, with ankle-
strap slippers, and a comb, and a dear little pinny over a blue frock!
And your friend can be the Mad Hatter.  Look well, wouldn't she, with a
hat on one side?  There are only the girls to see you, and the more
comic you can make yourself the better they'll be pleased.  You are
about to be introduced to a new side of Newnham life, and will see how
mad the students can be when they let themselves go.  You'll laugh
yourself ill before the evening's over.  Well, think it over, and come
back to me if you want any properties.  My dress will be easy enough--
braided hair, short white frock (butter-muslin at a penny the yard),
white stockings with sandals, another pair of stockings to cover my
arms, chalked face and neck, with peaked eyebrows and neat little spots
of red on the cheekbones and tip of the chin.  If you feel inclined to
be angelic, you might run up with your paint-box at the last minute, and
dab on my joints."

"Joints!"

Darsie gaped in bewilderment, whereupon Margaret cried resentfully--

"Well, I must _have_ joints, mustn't I?  How do you expect me to move?
A paint-box is invaluable on these occasions, as you'll find before you
are through.  Now, my love, I'll bid you a fond adieu, for work presses.
By the by, one word in your ear!  Don't ask a third-year girl to dance
with you if you value your nose!"

"What will happen to it if I do?"

"Snapped off!  Never mind I look pretty and meek, and perhaps she'll ask
_you_.  Now be off--be off--I must to work!"

Darsie descended to Hannah's study and proposed the idea of the Mad
Hatter, the which was instantly and scornfully declined.  Hannah
explained at length that though her head might be plain, it yet
contained more brains than other heads she could mention, and that to
play the part of idiot for a whole night long was a feat beyond the
powers of a mathematical student reading for honours.  She then
explained with a dignity which seemed somewhat misplaced that she had
set her heart upon representing a pillar-box, and was even now on the
point of sallying forth to purchase a trio of hat-boxes, which, being of
fashionable dimensions, would comfortably encircle her body.  Fastened
together so as to form a tube, covered with red sateen, and supported by
scarlet-stockinged legs, the effect would be pleasingly true to life.

"I'll have peep-holes for eyes, and the slit will outline my mouth.
Between the dances I'll kneel down in a corner so that the box touches
the ground, and I'll look so real, that I shall expect every one to drop
in _letters--chocolate_ letters, observe!  You might buy some and set
the example!"

For the next twenty-four hours an unusual air of excitement and bustle
pervaded the college, and the conversation at mealtime consisted for the
most part of fragmentary questions and answers bearing on the important
subject of costumes in making.

"Lend me your boot brushes, like a lamb!"

"Got an old pair of brown stockings you can't wear again?"

"Be an angel and lend me your striped curtains just for the night!"

"Spare _just_ ten minutes to sew up my back?"

So on it went, and in truth it was a pleasant chance to hear the merry,
inconsequent chatter; for, like every other class of the community, girl
students have their besetting sins, and one of the most obvious of these
is an air of assurance, of dogmatism, of final knowledge of life,
against which there can be no appeal.  Girls of nineteen and twenty will
settle a dispute of ages with a casual word; students of economy will
advance original schemes warranted to wipe the offence of poverty from
the globe; science students with unlowered voices will indulge across
the dinner-table in scathing criticisms on historic creeds which their
fathers hold in reverence; and on each young face, on each young tongue,
can be read the same story of certainty and self-esteem.

This state of mind is either sad, amusing, or exasperating, according to
the mood of the hearer; but, whatever be his mood, he yet knows in his
heart that it is a transitory phase, and an almost inevitable result of
theoretical knowledge.  A few years of personal grip with life and its
problems will make short work of that over-confidence, and replace it
with a gentler, sweeter touch.

But to-night was a night of frolic, and one would have to travel far
indeed to find a more amusing spectacle than an impromptu costume dance
in Clough Hall.  Beauty is a secondary consideration, and the girl who
has achieved the oddest and most ludicrous appearance is the heroine of
the hour.  Darsie Garnett made a fascinating Alice in Wonderland in her
short blue frock, white pinny, and little ankle-strap slippers, her hair
fastened back by an old-fashioned round comb, and eyebrows painted into
an inquiring arch, but she received no attention in comparison with that
lavished upon Hannah, when she dashed nimbly in at the door, and,
kneeling down in a corner of the room, presented a really lifelike
appearance of a pillar-box, a white label bearing the hours of
"Chocolate deliveries" pasted conspicuously beneath the slit.  Hannah's
prophecies proved correct, for it became one of the amusements of the
evening to feed that yawning cavity with chocolates and other dainties,
so that more than one sweet tooth in the assembly made a note of the
suggestion for a future day.

The Dutch Doll was another huge success; for so dolly and so beyond all
things Dutch did she appear, standing within the doorway with jointed
arms and rigid back, with dark hair plastered over the forehead in the
well-known curve, and the three little spots of colour blazing out from
the whitened background, that it was almost impossible to believe that
she was living flesh and blood.  Like a statue she stood until the
laughter and applause had lasted for several minutes, and then, stepping
jerkily on one side, made way for a new and even more startling
apparition.

Topsy, by all that was wonderful and unexpected!  A beaming, grinning
little nigger girl, with tightly curled hair, rolling eyes, and white
teeth showing to the gums.  A short gown of brilliantly striped cotton
reached to the knees, brown-stockinged arms and legs were matched by
brown-painted face and neck; standing side by side with the Dutch Doll,
the respective whiteness and brownness became accentuated to a
positively dazzling extent, and the onlookers were jubilant with
delight.  The climax was reached when the two waltzed off together round
the room, the doll sustaining a delightful stiffness and stoniness of
mien, while Topsy's grin threatened to reach to her very ears.

Ordinary costumes fell somewhat flat after these triumphs, though to the
Freshers there was a continuing joy in beholding dignified students in
their third year pirouetting in childlike abandonment.  There, for
instance, was the cleverest girl in college, of whom it was accepted as
a certainty that she would become a world-wide celebrity, an austere and
remote personage who was seldom seen to smile; there she stood, the
daintiest Christmas Cracker that one could wish to behold, in a sheath
of shimmery pink, tied in the middle by a golden string, finished at
either end with a froth of frills, and ornamented front and back with
immense bouquets of flowers.  By an ingenious arrangement also, if you
pulled a string in a certain way, a mysterious cracking sound was heard,
and a motto made its appearance bearing an original couplet whose
reference was strictly and delightfully local.

The run on these mottoes was great, and after their points were fully
enjoyed, they were folded carefully away, to be kept as souvenirs of the
great scholar of later years.

The evening was half over, and the girls had settled down to the dance,
when suddenly, unexpectedly, the great excitement arrived.  At a moment
when the music had ceased, and the various couples were preparing for
the usual promenade around the Hall, a loud roar was heard from without,
and into the middle of the floor there trotted nothing more nor less
than a tawny yellow lion, which, being confronted by a crowd of
spectators, drew back as if in fear, and crouched in threatening manner.
Its masked face showed a savage row of teeth; a mass of red hair,
shortened by that mysterious process known as "back combing," produced a
sufficiently convincing mane; a yellow skin hearthrug was wrapped round
the body, while paint and wadding combined had contrived a wonderfully
good imitation of claws.

It was the colour of the hair alone which revealed the identity of the
Lion to her companions.  "It's that wretched little ginger Georgie!"

"That little ginger beast!" went the cry from lip to lip.  But, abuse
her as they might, for the rest of the evening "Ginger Georgie" remained
the centre of attraction, as she persistently ambled after Topsy, and
gnawed at her brown feet, evidently recognising in her at once a
compatriot and a tit-bit.

Well, well!  _Il faut souffrire pour etre--celebre_!  When supper-time
arrived, and the lion's mask was removed, behold a countenance so
magenta with heat that compared with it even the Letter Box herself was
pale.  The two sufferers were waited upon with the most assiduous
attention, as was indeed only fair.  When one has voluntarily endured a
condition of semi-suffocation throughout an evening's "pleasuring" for
the unselfish reason of providing amusement for others, it's a poor
thing if one cannot be assisted to lemonade in return.

The Lion sat up well into the night combing out her mane; the Letter Box
had the first bad headache in her life, but both tumbled into bed at
last, proud and happy in the remembrance of an historic success.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

UNDERGRADUATE FRIENDS.

Hannah strolled into Darsie's study, open letter in hand.  "Here's
games!" she announced.  "An invitation from Mrs Hoare for myself and
friend--that's you--to go to tea on Sunday afternoon.  That's because
I'm Dan's sister, of course.  He'll be there, too, I expect, and the
handsome Percival, and lots more men.  The question is, shall we go?"

Now Mrs Hoare was the wife of the head of that well-known college of
which Dan and Ralph were members, and the invitation was therefore the
fulfilment of one of Darsie's dreams.

"Of course we'll go!" she cried ardently.  "Sunday tea at a man's
college is part of the Cambridge programme, and we want to see all that
we can.  Personally, I consider that they might have asked us before."
She lay back in her seat, and stared dreamily at the wall, puckering her
brow in thought, the while Hannah chuckled in the background.

"I know what you are thinking about!"

"You don't!" cried Darsie, and blushed, a deep guilty blush.

"I _do_!  Costume for Sunday, and the question of possibly squeezing out
three or four shillings to buy an extra bit of frippery to add to your
charms!"

"Boo!" cried Darsie impatiently; then with a sudden change of front:
"And if I _was_, I was perfectly right!  Newnham girls are not half
careful enough about their appearance, and it tells against the cause.
A perfect woman, nobly planned, ought to be as clever as she is--er--
dainty, and as dainty as she is clever."

"Thank you for the concession!  Very considerate of you, I'm sure.  If
you had stuck to `beautiful,' I should have been hopelessly left out.
Even `dainty' is beyond me, I'm afraid; but I'll promise you to be neat
and tidy, and saints can do no more--if they happen to have been born
_plain_ saints, that's to say!"

Hannah stood in front of the mirror, staring back at her flat, square
face with an expression of serenely detached criticism.

"If you are the beauty of this college, I run a close race for the booby
prize!  Bit of a handicap that, if you care about popularity.  This
Sunday afternoon now! they'll all be buzzing round you like so many
flies, while I do wallflower in a corner.  Nonsense to say that looks
don't count!  So far as I can see, the difference between your face and
mine will probably make the difference in our lives.  You'll marry a
lord of high degree, and I'll school marm and be maiden aunt."

"Oh, Hannah!"  Darsie was acutely discomfited by such words from
Hannah's lips.  True they were spoken in matter-of-fact tones, and
without the suspicion of a whine, but as the first instance of anything
approaching a lament, the occasion was historic.  "Oh, Hannah, dear--
it's only at first!  After the first no one cares a rap _what_ you look
like, so long as you're nice."

"Fal-de-ral!" cried Hannah scornfully.  "Of course they care!  Any one
would--should myself, but you needn't look so hang-dog, my dear.  It's
not _your_ fault, and I am quite comfortable, thank you.  If any man
ever wants to marry me, I'll know jolly well that it's for myself, and
that he really loves me through and through.  There isn't any of the
glamour business about this child to make him imagine that he cares,
when it's only a passing phase.  And if it's my lot to live alone, I'll
back myself to be as happy as most wives I come across.  It's my own
big, splendid life, and I'm going to _make_ it splendid, or know the
reason why!"  Hannah struck a dramatic gesture, danced a few fancy steps
in an elephantine manner, and stumped towards, the door.  "So be it,
then!  We accept with pleasure, and I'll leave you to trim your hat."

Whether or no any such embellishment did take place history sayeth not,
but it is certain that Darsie Garnett made a very charming picture on
the following Sunday afternoon, and that her dainty style of beauty
showed to peculiar advantage against the oak panelling of the stately
old room in which the head of --- College and his gracious, fragile-
looking wife dispensed tea to their guests.

The first few minutes after their arrival were rather an ordeal to the
two Freshers, who had never before been present at such a gathering, and
felt themselves the cynosure of every eye; but the kindness of host and
hostess soon put them at their ease.

A fair sprinkling of college men were in the room, handing round tea and
cakes to the guests.  Dan Vernon greeted Darsie with an illuminating
"Halloa!" and his sister with an even shorter grunt; but it was only
when she was comfortably settled down to tea that Darsie caught sight of
Ralph Percival's fair, close-clipped head at the far side of the table.
He seemed in no hurry to speak to her--a fact duly scored against him in
Miss Darsie's mind, and this indifference served to pique her into a
more vivacious reception of the attentions of his companions.

As Hannah had foretold, her pretty friend held quite a little court as
one man after another strolled up to join the animated group around her
chair.  There were two other girls in that group, and a married woman
with a strikingly sweet face, who had been introduced as the sister of
the hostess.  Mrs Reeves, as she was called, appeared to be on intimate
terms with the men, and her presence, instead of acting as a restraint,
only added to their enjoyment.  Darsie thought that she was a charming
creature, was conscious that she herself was being scrutinised with
special attention, and sincerely hoped that the verdict was favourable.
It was a curious person who did not wish to stand well in Alicia
Reeves's estimation!

Suddenly Ralph Percival edged in at the back of the group, and stationed
himself by Darsie with an air of possession.

"Well, Miss Darsie Garnett, isn't it about time that you had some talk
with me?"

"Quite time!"  Darsie's tone was eloquent, and she looked Ralph in the
face with a quiet steadiness, at which he had the grace to blush.  He
had been in no hurry to claim acquaintanceship until her social success
was assured; she was fully aware of the fact, but her pique died a rapid
death as she looked closely into the lad's face.  Ralph at twenty-two
was as handsome as in his boyhood, handsomer, indeed, but there were
other changes, which the girl's eyes were quick to read; for though we
may keep silence with our tongue, the hand of Time imprints marks upon
our features which are unfailing guides to our spiritual progress or
decline.

For many months past Ralph Vernon had persistently allowed himself to
fall short of his best, slacking in work, overstepping at play,
abandoning "straightness" for a gathering mesh of deceit.  Attached to
his name was an unsavoury reputation of card-playing for high stakes, of
drinking too much, although not to the extent of actual drunkenness; and
the character had alienated from him the friendship of serious men, and
evoked a disapproving aloofness in the manner of his instructors.  At
the moment when he most needed help those who were best fitted to give
it sedulously avoided his company, and in this first moment of meeting
Darsie was tempted to follow their example.

Horrid to look like that!  At his age to own those lines, those reddened
eyes, that dulled white skin!  Up went the little head, the slender neck
reared itself proudly, the red lips curled over small white teeth.
Darsie intended to wither Ralph by the sight of such obvious distaste,
but with the easy vanity of his nature he attributed her airs to girlish
pique at his own neglect, and was correspondingly elated thereat.

The little schoolgirl who had been his sister's friend had grown into a
"stunning girl," with whom the men were evidently greatly impressed.
Ralph decided that the hour had come to claim her as an old friend and
take her under his wing.  He sat himself down by her side and
persistently monopolised her attention.

"College life evidently suits you, Darsie.  You are looking rippingly
well!"

"Am I?  Sorry to be unable to return the compliment!"

"Oh!"  Ralph moved impatiently.  "Don't _you_ begin that tune!  It is
dinned into my ears from morning till night.  A fellow may swot himself
into a rag, and not a word will be said, but if he oversteps an inch for
his own amusement there's the dickens to pay.  I said from the start
that I intended to have a good rag.  College is one of the best times in
a man's life, and he's a fool if he doesn't make the most of his
chance."

"It is also--incidentally--supposed to be a time for mental
improvement," returned Darsie in sententious tones, which brought upon
her an instant rebuke.

"Oh, for pity's sake don't come the Newnham swag over me!  Can't stand
those girls as a rule.  Avoid 'em like poison.  Take my advice as an old
friend and avoid that style as you would the plague.  You're too jolly
pretty to come the strong-minded female.  Far better stick to your old
style.  Men like it a heap better."

"It is a matter of perfect indifference to me _what_ men like!" declared
Darsie, not, it is to be feared, with absolute veracity.  "I am proud to
be a Newnhamite, and if the girls do have a few mannerisms, they count
for precious little beside their virtues.  They are up to work, and they
_do_ work with might and main, though there can be no place in the world
where there is no fun.  We are always having some prank or other--
politicals, and cocoa-parties and hockey matches, and dances--"

"What's the fun of dances with no men to dance with?  Wait till May
term, and see what a real ball is like.  We'll have some river picnics,
too, and breakfasts at the Orchard.  There's lots to be done in summer,
but just now there's nothing on but teas.  You must come to tea in my
rooms.  I've got a slap-up study."  He turned towards Mrs Reeves and
addressed her with confident familiarity.  "Mrs Reeves will play
chaperon, and I'll promise you the best cakes that Cambridge can
produce."

"Oh, yes, I'll play chaperon."  To Darsie's surprise the sweet-faced
woman smiled back into Ralph's face with friendly eyes, not appearing
even to notice the over-confidence of his manner.  "Mr Percival gives
charming parties, and I can answer for it that his boast as to the cakes
is justified.  I can never fathom where he gets them."

She turned to Darsie with a little gesture of confidence, and slightly
lowered her voice.  "I am known as `the Professional Chaperon.'  I hope
you will engage my services if you are in need of such a personage, but
perhaps we ought to know one another a little better first.  I should
like so much to know you!  Will you come to see me one afternoon next
week when you are free, and feel inclined for a chat?  I won't ask any
one else, so that we can have a real cosy time."

Surprised and gratified, and more than a little flattered, Darsie
mentioned her free hours, and received in return Mrs Reeves's card
bearing an address in Grange Road, then once more Ralph engrossed her
attention.

"I say!  You might ask Ida up for a night or two, and bring her along.
They'll let you have a friend now and then, and she'd like it all right.
Awfully decent in writing to me, Ida is, and fights my battles at home.
Sensible girl!  Understand it's no good to jaw.  I'd like to have Ida
up for a bit."

"So would I.  I'll ask her with pleasure."  One of Ralph's best points
had been his affection for his sisters, and the reminder thereof
softened Darsie's heart.  She smiled at him with recovered friendliness.
"I'll ask Ida, and you must ask Dan and Hannah Vernon, and make a nice
family party.  Do you see much of Dan?  I don't expect _he_ makes a rag
of himself over amusement!"

Ralph shrugged carelessly.  "I've no use for Vernon!  Good head for
routine work, but as a pal, dull as you make 'em!  I'll ask him once as
you make a point of it, but I don't fancy you'll want him twice.  As for
the sister--but perhaps I'd better not make any remarks?"

"Much better!"  Darsie said frostily.  "Your manners have not improved,
Ralph.  I think, if you please, that I would rather not talk to you any
more for the present.  Would you tell Dan Vernon that I want him to take
your place?"

It was the first, the very first time in her life that Darsie had
essayed the part of queening it over a member of the opposite sex, and
the success of the venture was startling even to herself.  Ralph
flushed, flinched, rose without a word, and stalked across the room to
summon Dan as required; and Dan came meekly forward, seated himself in
the discarded chair, and faced her with an air of solemn expectation.
His rugged face looked plain and roughly hewn in contrast with Ralph's
classical features, but the dark eyes were eloquent as of yore, and the
sight of the tilted chin brought back a score of old-time memories.
Darsie looked at him with satisfaction, but with a disconcerting
blankness of mind as to what to say first.  From the other side of the
room Ralph was looking on with cynical eyes; it was imperative that the
silence should be broken at once.

"Dan, _please_ say something!  I wanted Ralph to go, so I asked for you.
Do please find something to say."

Dan smiled broadly.  Each time that she saw him smile Darsie wondered
afresh how she could ever have thought him plain.  His dark eyes glowed
upon her with the look she liked best to see.

"What am I to say?  It's good to see you here, Darsie.  You are looking
very--well!  Everything going all right?  Sure there's nothing I can
do?"

"No."  Darsie beamed happily.  At that moment there seemed nothing left
to wish.  Dan's friendliness gave the finishing touch to her content,
and the world was _couleur de rose_.  "I am loving it all more than I
expected.  The work's glorious, and the play's glorious, and I'm just
absorbed in both.  It's splendid, coming here to-day to see this lovely
old house and meet you again.  I thought you had forgotten all about
me."

But Dan had drawn back into his shell, and refused to be cajoled.  He
glowered at the opposite wall for some minutes, then asked abruptly--

"Why did you send off Percival?"

"Oh--!"  Darsie hesitated, and then answered with discretion: "I had
talked to him as much as I cared about for the moment, and I shall see
him soon again.  He is going to get up a tea-party for me, with that
sweet Mrs Reeves as chaperon.  I told him to ask you and Hannah."

"You should not have done that!"  Dan spoke with sharp displeasure.  "I
don't care to accept Percival's hospitality for myself, and certainly
not for my sister.  I shall tell Hannah to refuse."

Darsie glanced across to where Hannah sat, a typical plain Hannah at
that moment, with feet planted well apart, and on her face the
expression of dour determination which she adopted in moments of
boredom; from her to Ralph Percival, standing in graceful pose, his
fine, almost feminine, profile outlined clearly against the panelled
wall, and, glancing, laughed softly to herself.  It seemed so ridiculous
to think of this girl needing protection from this man.

"I fancy Hannah is quite capable of looking after herself."

"I'm sure of it.  She's a new-comer, however, and she doesn't get into
Percival's set if I can help it."

"Dan!  It can't be so bad if Mrs Reeves is willing to go.  She accepted
in a minute.  I heard her myself."

"She goes everywhere, to the wildest fellows' rooms.  She has her own
ideas, no doubt, but I don't profess to understand them."  He hesitated,
puckering his brows, and looking at her with dark, questioning eyes.  "I
have no authority over you, Darsie, but I wish--"

"Ralph saved my life," interrupted Darsie simply.

Dan looked at her sharply, stared with scrutinising attention at her
face, but spoke no further word of protest.  He evidently realised, as
Darsie did herself, that it would be a mean act to reject the friendship
of a man who had wrought so great a service.

Half an hour later the two girls slowly wended their way past the tower
gateway of Trinity, past Caius, with its twinkling lights, stately
King's, and modest Catherine's, to the homelike shelter of their own
dear Newnham.

"Well!" cried Hannah, breaking a long silence, "you had a big success
and I had--_not_!  But you're not a bit happier than I, that I can see.
Men are poor, blind bats.  I prefer my own sex; they are much more
discriminating, and when they like you--they _like_ you, and there's no
more shilly-shally.  Those men never know their own minds!"



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

MRS. REEVES MAKES A PROPOSAL.

Four days later Darsie went by appointment to her _tete-a-tete_ tea with
the professional chaperon with a pleasurable expectation which was
largely streaked with curiosity.

If physiognomy counted for anything, Mrs Reeves must surely be a most
sweet and noble character.  Her grey eyes looked into yours with a
straight, transparent gaze, her lips closed one upon another firmly
enough to debar all trace of weakness, yet not so firmly as to hint at
undue severity, her hair waved back from a broad white brow.  It was, as
Dan had said, difficult to understand how such a woman could be the
willing companion of men whom even fellow-students were anxious to shun.
Darsie wondered if the afternoon's conversation would throw any light
on this knotty point.

She was shown, not into the drawing-room but into a cosy little den on
the second floor, a sort of glorious edition of a college study, where
Mrs Reeves sat reading by the fire, clad in a loose velvet gown of a
curious reddish-brown, like the autumn tint of a leaf, which matched the
high lights of her chestnut hair.  Darsie watched her with fascinated
attention as she presided over the tea-table, with lithe, graceful
movements which made a poem out of the every-day proceeding, and Mrs
Reeves studied her in return, as she chatted lightly about a dozen
casual subjects.  Then the tea-things were carried away, and with the
drawing nearer to the fire conversation took a more intimate turn.

"I hope your friend did not think me inhospitable for not including her
in my invitation to-day, but when I want to get to know a girl I prefer
to have her entirely to myself.  Perhaps she will come another day.
Vernon's sister ought to be worth knowing."

"You know Dan?"  Darsie's smile was somewhat anxious, for Dan's own
manner with respect to her hostess was still a disturbing element.  "You
know him well?"

"No," Mrs Reeves smiled; "not well.  But I like him well by repute!
Vernon has no need of my services.  He is strong: enough to stand by
himself."

"You mean tea-parties?" queried Darsie vaguely, whereat Mrs Reeves
subsided into a ripple of laughter.

"No, I do _not_ mean tea-parties--something very much wider.  I don't
fancy, however, that Vernon is sociably disposed, and the authorities
here are not inclined to encourage meetings between the men and girl
students.  The head of his college is my brother-in-law, and one of your
Dons is a very old friend, so I hear the question discussed from both
sides, and then--like a wise woman--I gang my own gait!  So long as men
are men, and girls are girls, they are bound to attract each other; it's
natural and right, and when they are bound to meet in any case, it is my
little hobby to help them to do so under the best conditions.  I flatter
myself I am quite an expert in the art of being just chaperon enough,
and not too chaperon, and I never refuse to act if I can possibly
contrive to do so."

"No!  Dan said--" began Darsie involuntarily, and then stopped short
with a furious blush.  Mrs Reeves, however, did not share her
discomfiture; she laughed, and said shrewdly--

"Oh, I have observed his disapproving eye.  I can guess what he said.
Many people feel the same, who judge only from the surface, and don't
take the trouble to realise my motives.  One doesn't explain such things
to the world in general, but I want _you_ to understand.  If one man
less admirable than another; if his friends and his entertainments are
inclined to become rowdy and discreditable, does he need help _less_, or
more?  Vernon and other men of his kind consider that they do their duty
by leaving such a man severely alone.  I find mine in being with him--
just--as much--as ever I can!"  She emphasised the words by a series of
taps with the poker on the top of an obstinate coal, given in the most
delightfully school-girlish manner.  "I chaperon his parties; I talk to
him and his friends; I make myself so agreeable that they love to have
me, and want to have me again.  I try with every power I possess to
encourage all that is good, and kind, and honest, and cheering in
themselves and their conversation, and deftly, delicately, invisibly, as
it were, to fight against everything that is mean and unworthy.  It's
difficult, Darsie!--I may call you Darsie, mayn't I? it's such a
beguiling little name!--one of the most difficult feats a woman could
set herself to accomplish, and though I've had a fair measure of
success, it's only a measure.  It's such a great big work.  Think of all
that it means, that it _may_ mean to England, if we can keep these men
from drifting, and give them a pull-up in time!  I am constantly
looking, looking out for fellow-workers.  That's why I invited you here
to-day--to ask _you_ to be on my side!"

"I!"  Darsie's gasp of amazement sounded throughout the room.  "I!  Oh,
you can't mean it!  What could I do?  I can do nothing--I'm only a
girl!"

"Only a girl!  But, dear child, that's your finest qualification!  You
can do more than I can ever accomplish, just because you _are_ a girl,
and will be admitted to an intimacy which is impossible for me.
Besides, Darsie, you are a particularly pretty and attractive girl into
the bargain; you know that, don't you?  You _ought_ to know it, and be
very, very thankful for a great weapon given into your hands.  If you
will join the ranks with me, and act as my curate, you will immensely
increase my power for good."

"But I can't!  I can't!  I'd love to if I could, but you don't know how
impossible it is.  I couldn't preach to save my life."

"I'm thankful to hear it.  I don't want you to preach.  You'd soon lose
your influence if you did.  It's a case of _being_, Darsie, rather than
doing; being your truest, sweetest, highest self when you are with these
men, so that they may feel your influence through all the fun and
banter.  Lots of fun, please; you can't have too much of that; a dull
girl is soon left to herself.  People in general don't half realise the
influence of just right _thinking_--the atmosphere which surrounds a
person who is mentally fighting for good.  The sunbeams fall on the dark
earth and soak up the poisoned waters, and so may our thoughts--our
prayers," She was silent for a few moments, her hand resting lightly on
Darsie's knees.  "There is a girl in your house--Margaret France--I
expect you know her!  She has been one of my best helpers these last
years.  Wherever Margaret is there is fun and laughter; she is just
brimful of it, but--can you imagine any one going to Margaret with an
unworthy thought, an unworthy cause?  I want you to follow in her
steps!"

She paused again for a long minute, then said slowly and emphatically--

"Ralph Percival needs help, Darsie!  He has not fallen very low as yet,
but he is drifting.  He is in a bad set, and, like too many of our
richer men, he lacks purpose.  They come up here because their fathers
have been before them, and it is the correct thing to do.  There is no
real reason why they should work, or take a high place, but there seems
to themselves every reason why they should have a good time.  Parents
sometimes seem to hold more or less the same opinion; at others they
seem distressed, but powerless.  College authorities are regarded as
natural enemies; religious influences for the time beat on closed doors;
now, Darsie, here comes the chance for `only a girl!'  A man like Ralph
Percival, at this stage of his life, will be more influenced by a girl
like you than by any power on earth.  It's a law of Nature and of God,
and if every girl realised it, it would be a blessed thing for the race.
I once heard a preacher say that so long as one dealt with general
principles, and talked broadly of the human race, there was very little
done.  We have to fine it down to _my next door neighbour_ before we
really set to work.  Fine down what I have said to Ralph Percival,
Darsie, and help me with him!  He's drifting.  He needs you.  Help me to
pull him back!"

Darsie nodded dumbly.  Mrs Reeves thought the expression on her
downcast face touchingly sweet and earnest, but even she missed the clue
to the girl's inmost thought.

Years ago she herself had been drifting, drifting towards death, and
Ralph had stepped forward to save her; now, in an allegorical sense, the
positions were reversed, and she was summoned to the rescue.  There was
no refusing a duty so obvious.  Heavy and onerous as the responsibility
might be, it had been placed in her hands.  Darsie braced herself to the
burden.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

CHRISTMAS DAY.

It was Christmas Day; fifteen eventful months had passed by since Darsie
Garnett and Hannah Vernon had made their appearance in Clough in the
character of modest and diffident Freshers.  Now, advanced to the
dignity of second-year girls, they patronised new-comers with the best,
and talked, thought, and behaved as though, deprived of their valuable
support, the historical centre of Cambridge must swiftly crumble to the
dust.

The little air of assurance and self-esteem which seems inseparable from
a feminine student had laid its hand on Darsie's beauty, robbing it of
the old shy grace, and on each fresh return to the old home Clemence and
Lavender eloquently described themselves as "squelched flat" by the
dignified young woman who sailed about with her head in the air, and
delivered an ultimatum on every subject as it arose, with an air of "My
opinion is final.  Let no dog bark!"

These mannerisms, however, were only, after all, a veneer; and when two
or three days of merry, rollicking family life had passed by, the old
Darsie made her appearance once more, forgot to be learned and superior,
forbore to refer to college and college ways in every second or third
sentence, and showed a reviving interest in family affairs.

Clemence was fatter than ever, a subject of intense mortification to
herself, though at each fresh meeting she confided in whispered asides
that she had "lost five pounds--ten pounds," as the case might be.  No
one believed in these diminutions, but if one happened to be amiably
disposed, one murmured vaguely, and affected conviction; and if one were
not, one openly jeered and scoffed!  Lavender was sentimental and wrote
poetry in which "pale roses died, in the garden wide, and the wind blew
drear, o'er the stricken mere."  She had advanced to the dignity of long
skirts, and dressed her hair--badly!--in the latest eccentricity of
fashion.

Vie Vernon, on the contrary, had developed into a most elegant person,
quite an accomplished woman of the world, darkly suspected of "going to
be engaged" to a young lawyer with a dark moustache, who had lately
developed a suspicious fondness for her father's company.

It really gave one quite a shock to realise _how_ grown-up the old
companions had become even the brothers Harry and Russell were
transformed into tall striplings who bought newspapers on their own
account, and preferred, actually _preferred_, to be clean rather than
dirty!  It was a positive relief to listen to Tim's loud voice, look at
his grimy paws, and reflect that one member of the family was still in
the enjoyment of youth.

As usual, the postman's arrival was the first excitement of Christmas
morning.  He brought with him an armful of letters and parcels, and
Darsie was quick to spy Ralph Percival's handwriting upon one of the
smallest and most attractive-looking of the packets.

The colour came into her cheeks as she looked, but after holding the
parcel uncertainly for a moment, she laid it down again, and proceeded
to open other letters and boxes, leaving this particular one to the
last.  An onlooker would have been puzzled to decide whether it was more
dread or expectation which prompted this decision; and perhaps Darsie
herself could hardly have answered the question.  The table was soon
spread with envelopes and wrappings of paper which had enclosed
souvenirs from college friends, and the more costly offerings from Mrs
Percival and her girls, inscribed with the orthodox words of greeting.
Darsie ranged them in order, and then, still hesitating, turned to the
last packet of all.

Inside was a note folded so as to act as additional wrapper for a small
white box.  Ralph's writing, large and well-formed like himself, filled
the half-sheet.

"Dear Darsie,--I hope you will accept the enclosed trifle which has been
made for you, from my own design.  You will understand its meaning!  I
am more than ever in need of pulling up!  Don't fail a fellow, Darsie!

"Yours,--

"Ralph B.  Percival."

Inside the box lay a small but beautifully modelled anchor brooch, with
a fine golden rope twined round the stock.  Darsie looked at it with the
same mingling of joy and pain which seemed inseparable from each stage
of her friendship with this attractive but irresponsible young man.

It was just like Ralph to have thought of this pretty and graceful way
of expressing his sentiments, and it was not in girl nature to resist a
glow of gratified vanity; but as she turned the golden anchor in her
hands and realised the significance of the symbol, an old impatience
stirred in Darsie's heart.  A man who trusted to another for anchorage
in life, and who was ever in danger of breaking loose and drifting on to
the rocks, was not the strong knight of a young girl's dreams.  There
were moments when the protecting tenderness which had prompted the last
year's efforts gave place to sudden intolerance and resentment.

Inspired by Mrs Reeves's words in her first term at college, Darsie had
set gallantly to the task of influencing Ralph Percival for good, and
preventing his further deterioration.  At first it had appeared a
forlorn hope; and she would have despaired many a time if it had not
been for the encouragement which she received from Mrs Reeves and her
"curate," Margaret France.  Then gradually and surely her influence had
begun to make itself felt.  It could not truthfully be said that she had
so inspired Ralph that he had turned over a new leaf, and abandoned bad
practices from a desire for the right itself.  If the truth must be
told, desire for his pretty mentor's approbation and praise had been a
far stronger factor in the improvement which seemed to have been
effected.

Ralph was emotional, and as his interest in Darsie deepened into the
sentimental attachment which seemed a natural development of their
intimacy, he grew increasingly anxious to stand well in her estimation.
During the May term there had been teas in the college gardens,
breakfast parties at the Orchard, picnics on the river, which had
afforded opportunities of _tete-a-tete_ conversations when, amidst the
flowers and the sunshine, it had been quite an agreeable sensation to
lament over one's weaknesses and shortcomings, and to receive in return
the wisest of counsels from Darsie's pretty lips.

"To please _you_, Darsie!--I'm hanged if I care what other people think,
but if _you_ ask me--" The promises gained were all couched in this
personal vein.  "If you chuck me, Darsie, I shan't worry any more."
This was the threat held out for the future.  Unsatisfactory, if you
will, yet the fact remained that for the first part of the last term
Ralph _had_ appeared to show greater interest in work than he had before
manifested, and had been involved in a minimum of scrapes.

There were moments when, remembering these facts, Darsie felt proudly
that she had not lived in vain; moments when Ralph's dependence on
herself and graceful acknowledgments of her help seemed the chief
interest in life.  But there were also other moments when the bond
between them weighed heavy as a chain.  In less than two years the
training days would be over, Ralph would be a man, and she herself a
woman on the threshold of life.  Would she be expected to play the part
of permanent anchor, and, if so, could she, should she undertake the
task?

For the last few weeks of the term Darsie had been so absorbed in her
own surroundings that she had had no time or thought to bestow on
outside interests, and Mrs Reeves being abroad, no college news came to
her ears from that source.

Now since the beginning of the holidays Ralph's name had hardly been
mentioned, since family interests were predominant, and Darsie had
learned from experience that the subject of "Percival" was calculated to
send Dan Vernon into his most taciturn mood.

On this Christmas morning, however, Darsie was in a mood of somewhat
reckless gaiety; let the future take care of itself.  For to-day, at
least, she was young and happy and free; the Vernon family was coming
over in bulk to spend the evening, when the presence of one of Dan's
chums would supply an agreeable element of novelty to the occasion.  Not
one single gloomy thought must be allowed to cloud the sunshine of this
Christmas Day!

Dinner was served at seven o'clock, and was truly a festive occasion.
The dining-room table being unequal to the task of providing
accommodation for sixteen people, the schoolroom table had to be used as
a supplement.  It was a good inch higher than the other, and supplied
with a preponderance of legs, but these small drawbacks could not weigh
against the magnificent effect of the combined length, covered, as it
was, with fruit, flowers, and a plethora of bright red bonbons and
crackers.  The girls wore their prettiest evening frocks; the turkey,
the goose, the plum-pudding, and the mince-pies were all paragons of
their kind, while dessert was enlivened by the discovery of small
surprise presents cunningly hidden away within hollowed oranges, apples,
and nuts.  Silver thimbles, pocket-calendars, stamp-cases, sleeve-links,
and miniature brooches, made their appearance with such extraordinary
unexpectedness that Darsie finally declared she was afraid to venture to
eat even a grape, lest she might swallow a diamond alive!

When the hilarious meal had come to an end, the company adjourned into a
drawing-room illumined by firelight only, but such firelight!  For over
a week those logs had been stacked by the kitchen grate so that they
might become "as dry as tinder."

Placed in the big grate, they sent up a leaping, crackling flame which
was in itself an embodiment of cheer, and when the sixteen chairs were
filled and ranged in a circle round the blaze, there was a Christmas
picture complete, and as goodly and cheery a picture as one need wish to
see.  A basket of fir-cones stood at either side of the grate, and the
order of proceedings was that each guest in turn should drop a cone into
the heart of the fire, and relate an amusing story or coincidence the
while it burned.  Results proved that the amount of time so consumed
varied so strangely that suggestions of foul play were made by more than
one raconteur.

"It's not fair!  Some one has got at these cones!  Some of them have
been soaked to make them damp!--"

Be that as it may, no one could possibly have foretold who would happen
to hit on this particular cone, so that the charge of injustice fell
swiftly to the ground.

Mrs Garnett opened the ball with a coincidence taken from her own life,
the cone burning bright and blue the while.

"When I was a girl of twenty, living at home with my father and mother,
I had a curiously distinct dream one night about a certain Mr
Dalrymple.  We knew no one of that name, but in my dream he appeared to
be a lifelong friend.  He was a clergyman, about sixty years of age--not
handsome, but with a kind, clever face.  He had grey hair, and heavy
black eyebrows almost meeting over his nose.  I was particularly
interested in his appearance, because--this is the exciting part!--in
my dream I was engaged to him, and we were going to be married the
following month...  Next morning, when I awoke, the impression left was
unusually distinct, and at breakfast I made them all laugh over my
matrimonial plans.  My sisters called me `Mrs Dalrymple' for several
days, and then the joke faded away, and was replaced by something newer
and more exciting.  Two years passed by, and then, in the summer
holidays, I went to Scotland to pay a visit.  A slight accident on the
line delayed me at a small station for a couple of hours, and I strolled
through the village to pass the time by seeing what could be seen.  It
was a dull little place, and the principal street was empty of every one
but a few children until, when I reached the end, a man in a black coat
came suddenly out of a house and walked towards me.  He was tall and
elderly and thin, his hair was grey, his eyebrows were dark and met in a
peak over his nose.  My heart gave a great big jump, for it was the face
of the man I had seen in my dream--the man who was to have been my
husband!  You can imagine my surprise!  It was many, many months since I
had given a thought to the silly old dream, but at the first glance at
that face the memory of it came back as clear and distinct as on the
morning after it had happened.  I walked towards him quite dazed with
surprise, and then another extraordinary thing happened!  He was
evidently short-sighted, and could not distinguish figures at a
distance, but presently, as we drew nearer together, he in his turn
started violently, stared in my face as if he could hardly believe his
eyes, and then rushed forward and seized me by the hand.  `I _am_ glad
to see you--I _am_ glad!  This _is_ a pleasure!  When did you come?'
Poor old man!  My blank face showed him his mistake, and he dropped my
hand and began to mumble out apologies.  `I've made a mistake.  I
thought you were--I thought you were--' He frowned, evidently searched
in vain for a clue, and added feebly, `I thought I knew you.  _Your face
is so familiar_!'  It was all over in a minute.  He took off his hat,
and hurried on overcome with embarrassment, and I turned mechanically in
the direction of the church.  It was closed, but by the gate stood a
board bearing the hours of services, and beneath them the name of the
minister of the parish.  I read it with a thrill.  The name was `_The
Rev.  John Dalrymple_'!"

Mrs Garnett lay back in her chair with the contented air of a
_raconteuse_ who has deftly led up to a _denouement_, and her audience
gasped in mingled surprise and curiosity.

"How _thrilling_!  How weird!"

"What an extraordinary thing!  Go on!  Go on!  And what happened next?"

Mrs Garnett chuckled contentedly.

"I met your father, married him, and lived happily ever after!  As for
Mr Dalrymple, I never met him again nor heard his name mentioned.  The
sequel is not at all exciting, but it was certainly an extraordinary
coincidence, and caused me much agitation at the time.  I have timed
myself very well--my cone has just burned out.  Who's turn comes next?"

There followed a somewhat lengthened pause while every one nudged a
next-door neighbour, and disdained responsibility on his own account.
Then Mr Vernon stepped into the breach.

"I heard a curious thing the other day.  A friend of mine was taken
suddenly ill on a hillside in Switzerland, was carried into a chalet and
most kindly tended by the good woman.  When, at the end of several
hours, he was well enough to leave, he wished to make her a present of
money.  She refused to take it, but said that she had a daughter in
service in England, and that it would be a real pleasure to her, if,
upon his return, my friend would write to the girl telling her of his
visit to the old home.  He asked for the address, and was told, `Mary
Smith, care of Mr Spencer, The Towers, Chestone.'  He read it, looked
the old woman in the face and said, `_I_ am Mr Spencer!  _I_ live at
The Towers, Chestone; and my children's nurse is called Mary Smith!'
There!  I can vouch for the absolute truth of that coincidence, and I
think you will find it hard to beat."

"And what did he say to the nurse?" asked literal Clemence, to the
delight of her brothers and sisters, whose imaginary dialogues between
master and maid filled the next few minutes with amusement.

Dan's friend hailed from Oxford, and gave a highly coloured account of a
practical joke in several stages, which he had played on an irritating
acquaintance.  The elder members of the party listened with awe, if
without approval, but Tim showed repeated signs of restlessness, and in
a final outburst corrected the narrator on an all-important point.

"That's the way they had it in _Britain's Boys_!" he declared, whereupon
the Oxford man hid his head under an antimacassar, and exclaimed
tragically that all was discovered!  "Now it's Darsie's turn!  Tell us a
story, Darsie--an adventure, your own adventure when you went out in
that punt, and the mill began working--"

"Why should I tell what you know by heart already?  You'd only be
bored."

"Oh, but you never tell a story twice over in the same way," persisted
Clemence with doubtful flattery.  "And Mr Leslie has never heard it.
I'm sure he'd be interested.  It really _was_ an adventure.  So
romantic, too.  Ralph Percival is _so_ good-looking!"

"I fail to see what his looks have to do with it," said Darsie in her
most Newnham manner.  "Strong arms were more to the purpose, and those
he certainly does possess."

"Strong arms--stout heart!" murmured Lavender in sentimental aside.
"Well, then, tell about the treasure-hunt in the Percivals' garden--and
how you--you know!  Go on--that's another _real_ adventure."

"All Miss Darsie's adventures seem to have been in connection with the
Percival family!" remarked the Oxford man at this point.

Darsie flushed with annoyance, and retired determinedly into her shell.
She was seated almost in the centre of the circle, between her father
and John Vernon, and the leaping light of the fire showed up her face
and figure in varying shades of colour.  Now she was a rose-maiden,
dress, hair, and face glowing in a warm pink hue; anon, the rose changed
into a faint metallic blue, which gave a ghostlike effect to the slim
form; again, she was all white--a dazzling, unbroken white, in which the
little oval face assumed an air of childlike fragility and pathos.  As
she sat with her hands folded on her knee, and her head resting against
the dark cushions of her chair, more than one of the company watched her
with admiration: but Darsie was too much occupied with her own thoughts
to be conscious of their scrutiny.

As each story-teller began his narrative, she cast a momentary glance in
his direction, and then turned back to fire-gazing once more.  Once or
twice she cast a curious glance towards the far corner where Dan Vernon
was seated, but he had drawn his chair so far back that nothing could be
distinguished but the white blur of shirt-front.  Darsie wondered if Dan
were uninterested, bored, asleep--yet as her eyes questioned the
darkness she had the strangest impression of meeting other eyes--dark,
intent eyes, which stared, and stared--

Vie Vernon was telling "a _most interesting_ coincidence," her opening
sentence--"It was told to me by a friend--a lawyer,"--causing
surreptitious smiles and nudges among her younger hearers.  "There was a
girl in his office--a typewriting girl.  All the money had been lost--"

"Whose money?  The lawyer's or the office's?"

"Neither!  Don't be silly.  The girl's father's, of course."

"You never told us that she had a father!"

"Russell, if you interrupt every minute, I won't play.  Of course he'd
lost it, or the girl wouldn't have been a typist.  Any one would know
that!  Ed--the lawyer did sea-sort of business--what do you call it?--
marine things--and the girl typed them.  Years before a brother had
disappeared--"

"The lawyer's brother?"

"No!  I'm sorry I began.  You are so disagreeable, The _girl's_ uncle,
of course, and they often wanted to find him, because he was rich, and
might have helped them now they were poor.  One day, when she was typing
out one of the depositions--"

"Ha!"  The unusual word evoked unanimous comment.  "`De-pos-itions--if
you please'!  How legal we are becoming, to be sure!"

Vie flushed, and hurried on breathlessly--

"She came across the name of John H.  Rose, and she wondered if the H.
meant Hesselwhaite, for that was her uncle's second name, and she looked
it up in the big document, and it _was_ him, and he was on the west
coast of South America, and they wrote to him, and he left them a lot of
money, and they lived happy ever after."

Polite murmurs of astonishment from the elders, unconcealed sniggerings
from the juniors, greeted the conclusion of this thrilling tale, and
then once more Darsie was called upon for her contribution, and this
time consented without demur.

"Very well!  I've thought of a story.  It's about a managing clerk who
was sent to Madrid on business for his firm.  I didn't know him myself,
so don't ask questions!  While he was in Madrid he went to the opera one
night, and sat in a box.  Just opposite was another box, in which sat a
beauteous Spanish maid.  He looked at her, and she looked at him.  They
kept looking and looking.  At last he thought that she smiled, and waved
her fan as if beckoning him to come and speak to her.  So in the first
interval the eager youth made his way along the richly carpeted
corridors; but just as he reached the door of the box it opened, and a
man came out and put a letter into his hand.  It was written in Spanish,
which the youth did not understand; but, being filled with a frenzy of
curiosity to know what the fair one had to say, he decided to run to his
hotel, and get the manager to translate it without delay.  Well, he
went; but as soon as the manager had read the note he started violently,
and said in a manner of the utmost concern: `I exceedingly regret, sir,
to appear inhospitable or inconsiderate, but I find it my painful duty
to ask you to leave my hotel within an hour.'  The clerk protested,
questioned, raged, and stormed, but all in vain.  The manager refused
even to refer to the letter; he simply insisted that he could entertain
him no longer in the hotel, and added darkly: `It would be well for the
Senor to take the first train out of Spain.'

"Alarmed by this mysterious warning, the unhappy youth accordingly shook
off the dust from his feet and returned to London, where he confided his
woes to his beloved and generous employer.  The employer was a Spanish
merchant and understood the language, so he naturally offered to solve
the mystery.  No sooner, however, had his eye scanned the brief lines,
than a cloud shadowed _his_ expressive countenance, and he addressed
himself to the youth more in sorrow than in anger.  `It grieves me to
the heart, Mr--er--_Bumpas_,' he said, `to sever our connection after
your faithful service to the firm; but, after the perusal of this note,
I have unfortunately no choice.  If you will apply to the cashier he
will hand you a cheque equal to six months' salary; but I must ask you
to understand that when you leave my office this morning it is for the
last time!'"

A rustle of excitement from the audience, a momentary glimpse of Dan's
face in the flickering light, testified to the interest of this
extraordinary history.

Darsie bent forward to encourage her fir-cone with a pat from the poker,
and continued dramatically--

"Bewildered, broken-hearted, almost demented, the unfortunate youth
betook him to an uncle in America (all uncles seem to live in America),
who received him with consideration, listened to his sad tale, and bade
him be of good cheer.  `By a strange coincidence' (coincidence again!)
said the worthy man, `there sups with me to-night a learned professor of
languages, resident at our local college.  He, without doubt, will make
plain the mysterious contents of the fatal note!'  Punctual to his hour
the professor arrived, and the harassed youth hailed with joy the end of
his long suspense.  Whatever might be the purport of the words written
in that fatal paper, the knowledge thereof could not be worse than the
fate which had dogged his footsteps ever since that tragic night when he
had first cast eyes on the baleful beauty of the Spanish maid.  Yet
might it not be that once again the sight of these words would send him
wandering homeless o'er the world--that the stream of his uncle's
benevolence might be suddenly damned by a force mysterious as
inexorable?

"Trembling with emotion, the young man thrust his hand into his pocket
to bring forth this mystic note--"

Darsie paused dramatically.

"And--and--and then--?"

"He discovered that it was not there!  In the course of his long
wanderings it had unfortunately been mislaid."

The clamour of indignation which followed this _denouement_ can be
better imagined than described but the example having been set,
wonderful how many stories of the same baffling character were revived
by the different members of the company during the remainder of the
firelight _stance_.  So wild and exaggerated did the narratives become,
indeed, that the meeting broke up in confusion, and took refuge in those
admittedly uproarious Christmas games which survived from the happy
nursery days, when "to make as much noise as we like" seemed the climax
of enjoyment.

And so ended Christmas Day for the joint ranks of the Vernons and
Garnetts.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE MELODRAMA.

On Boxing Day, Lavender excused herself from joining a rinking party,
and lay curled up on a sofa reading a Christmas number.

The following morning she stayed in bed to breakfast, and complained of
a swollen face.  On the third day, the sight of the huge cheeks and
doubled chin sent the family flying for the doctor, and the tragic
verdict of "mumps" was whispered from mouth to mouth.

Mumps in the Christmas holidays!  Isolation for the victim for days,
even weeks; the risk of infection for others; the terrible, unthinkable
possibility of "missing a term"!  Mrs Vernon came nobly to the rescue,
and invited Darsie to spend the remainder of the holidays under her
roof, since, with a Tripos in prospect, every precaution must be taken
against infection.  For the rest, Lavender's own little eyrie was
situated at the end of a long top passage, and might have been
originally designed for a sanatorium and there, in solitary state, the
poor mumpy poetess bewailed her fate, and besought the compassion of her
companions.  Letters were not forbidden, and she therefore found a sad
satisfaction in pouring out her woes on paper, as a result of which
occupation the following poetical effusion presently found its way to
the schoolroom party--

  "All gay and fair the scene appeared:
  I was a gladsome maid;
  When the dire hand of circumstance
  Upon my life was laid.
  Upon the eve of festal day
  The first dread symptoms fell;
  And those who should have sympathised,
  Whose tender words I would have prized,
  Did sneer, and jeer, and with loud cries,
  Ascribe the reason to mince-pies!

  "What time I woke the third day morn,
  By mirror was the sad truth borne;
  Not alone exile, grief, and pain
  Must fill my cup--but also _shame_!
  Gone is my youthful glee and grace,
  I have an elephantine face;
  My cheeks are gross, which were so thin;
  I have a loathsome pendant chin.
  All who behold me smile aside,
  And their derision barely hide.
  Oh, cruel fate! instead of tears,
  In my sad plight I get but jeers.

  "Friends, comrades, readers of this ditty,
  If heart ye have, on me have pity.
  Go not unthinking on your way,
  Content to sing, content to play,
  While I and mumps sit here alone
  In an unending, drear `At home.'
  Put wits to work, think out some way
  To cheer the captive's lonely day,
  Forget yourself, and think of me,
  And doubly blessed you shall be.
  For since the days of earliest youth
  You have been brought up on this truth--
  To help the ailing by your side
  Is the true work of Christmas-tide!"

To disregard so touching an appeal being plainly an impossibility, an
impromptu committee meeting was held in the Vernons' study, when the
idea of an open-air melodrama was proposed, and carried with
acclamation.  A melodrama acted in the back garden, underneath
Lavender's window, opened out prospects of amusement for the actors as
well as the audience, and a rainy afternoon was passed in the merriest
fashion discussing the plot, characters, and costume.

Darsie sat on the hearthrug, and prodded the fire vigorously to mark
each point scored.  Vie wrote from dictation at the centre table.  Dan
sat chuckling in his own particular chair, and allowed himself to be
cast as hero with lamblike calm, and plain Hannah affected dire
displeasure at being passed over for the part of beauteous maid.  It was
like the dear old days when they had all been young--_really_ young--in
pinafores and pigtails, with no dread of coming Tripos, no agitation
about youthful lawyers to chase away sleep at night!  Looking back
through the years, that hour stood out in remembrance as one most
happily typical of the dear home life.

The programme was delicious.  Vie discovered a great sheet of white
paper, left over from the parcel wrappings of the week before; Dan
printed the words in his most dashing fashion; John nailed it on the lid
of a packing-chest, and the whole party escorted it round the terrace to
the Garnett dwelling, and waited in the street beneath until it was
conveyed upstairs, and Lavender, discreetly swathed in a shawl, appeared
at her lighted window and waved a towel in triumph.

This was the programme--

  On Wednesday Afternoon Next (_Weather permitting_)
  In Aid of the Fund for Sick and Suffering Spinsters
  A First Performance will be given of
  The Blood-Curdling and Hair-Raising Melodrama entitled
  The Blue Cabbage
  by Allthelotofus.

  _Dramatis Personae_.
  Efflorescence (A Guileless Maid)--Miss Darsie Garnett.
  Meretricia (1st Villainess)--Mr Harry Garnett.
  Mycrobe (2nd Villainess)--Mr Russell Garnett.
  Elijah B.  Higgins (Hero)--Mr Dan Vernon.
  Sigismund La Bas (A False Caitiff)--Mr Percy Lister.
  D.  Spenser (Certificated Poisonmonger)--Mr John Vernon.
  Endeavora (A Well-Meaner)--Miss Clemence Garnett.
  The Greek Chorus--Miss Hannah Vernon.

  _N.B.--_There is no Cabbage!

Imagine the feelings of a solitary invalid on receipt of such a
programme as the above--a programme of an entertainment organised,
composed, and designed wholly and solely for her own amusement!
Lavender's mumps were at a painful stage--so sore, so stiff, so heavy,
that she felt all face, had no spirit to read, craved for companionship,
and yet shrank sensitively from observing eyes.  Let those jeer who may,
it _is_ an abominable thing to feel a martyr, and look a clown, and poor
Lavender's sensitive nature suffered acutely from the position.  Then
oh! it was good to feel that to-morrow something exciting was going to
happen--that she would be amused, cheered, comforted; that her dear
companions would be near her, so near that once again she would feel one
of the merry throng.

If only it were fine!  Really and truly Lavender felt that she could not
support the blow if it were _wet_.  Mumps seem to sap the constitution
of moral force; if she could not see the melodrama, she would weep like
a child!

It _was_ fine, however.  The very elements conspired in her behalf, and
produced a still, unshiny day, when the pageant of the melodrama
appeared to the best advantage, and the voices rose clear and distinct
to that upper window, before which Lavender stood, a muffled figure, in
a fur coat and cap, and a great wool shawl swathed round face and neck
after the fashion of an English veil.

The melodrama proved even more thrilling than had been expected.  On
his, or her, first appearance on the scene, each character advanced to a
spot directly in front of the upstairs window, and obligingly related
the salient points of his life, character, and ambitions, together with
a candid exposition of his intentions towards the other members of the
cast; the while Hannah, as Greek Chorus, interposed moral remarks and
reflections on the same.  After an indulgent hearing of these
confessions, it would appear that two ambitions were common to the
actors--either they wished to elope with the hero or heroine, or to
poison the False Caitiff, and the Villainess Number One or Two, or such
a contingent of these worthies as excluded themselves.

The Well-Meaner assiduously endeavoured to foil these intents, and
received the scant amount of encouragement which falls to well-meaning
interference in real life; the Certified Poisonmonger presided over
three tin pails of liquids, labelled respectively, "Lingering,"
"Sudden," and "A highly superior article in writhes and coils.  As
patronised by the Empress of China" and the demand for these wares was
naturally brisk in so quarrelsome a company: the False Caitiff chose a
sudden death for his rival, the Hero; Meretricia, the first Villainess,
poisoned the Caitiff by a more lingering means; Villainess Number Two,
under the false impression that the Hero had given his heart to
Meretricia, poisoned that good lady, sparing no money on the deed,
whereby Russell was afforded an admirable opportunity of exhibiting his
wriggling powers.  The guileless maid poisoned herself with the dregs in
her lover's glass; and the Poisonmonger, fatigued with the rush of
Christmas business, fainted away, and, being revived by potions from his
own pails, survived only long enough to administer a forcible dose in
revenge.  The Well-Meaner's fate differed from that of her companions in
that she was insidiously poisoned by each actor in turn, so that,
figuratively speaking, the curtain descended upon a row of corpses, in
the midst of which the Greek Chorus intoned exemplary precepts and
advice.

Hannah, as Greek chorus, was by common consent pronounced the star of
the company, her interpolated reflections being so droll and to the
point that even the lingering victims found themselves overcome with
laughter.

As for the audience, her joy, though great, was not unmixed with pain.
As the melodrama approached its critical point the actors could see her
at her window, holding up her mumps with either hand, and the piteous
plea--"Don't make me laugh!  Don't make me laugh!" floated down on the
wintry air.

Next day Lavender was worse, and melodramas were banned as a means of
recreation; but she sent a touching message of thanks to the troupe, in
which she declared that "the joy outweighed the pain," so that, all
things considered, "The Blue Cabbage" was voted a great success.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

DAN AND DARSIE.

No sooner did the news of Lavender's illness, and Darsie's consequent
absence from home, reach the Percival household than three separate
letters were dispatched, insisting that at least a part of the remaining
holidays should be spent at the Manor.

Pray why, the girls demanded, should Hannah Vernon be allowed to engross
Darsie, when she enjoyed her society practically the whole year round?
It was unjust, mean, contemptible.  They were so dull and sad this
Christmas-time.  Wouldn't Darsie come?

Pray why, inquired Ralph ingenuously, did Darsie not come when she had
the chance?  She knew that he would be glad to see her.  It was quite
horribly dull.  The parents were absurdly humped--

Mrs Percival's words were few but disturbing: "I want to consult with
you about Ralph.  You have more influence over him than any one else.
Do come, dear child, if you possibly can."

In face of the last letter it was impossible to say no.  Darsie was not
sure that she wanted to say no; on the other hand, she was aggravatingly
uncertain if she wanted to say yes.  At college and at home alike the
atmosphere was at once austere and bracing; it would be agreeable to
live for a time in the lap of luxury--to be regarded as a miracle of
cleverness and beauty; which treatment was invariably bestowed upon her
during her visits to The Manor.  She would enjoy staying with the
Percivals, but she would be sad to miss the cosy hours when Dan and his
friend, Percy Lister, joined the little party in the old study, and they
all talked together round the fire.  What talks they had; what themes
they discussed!  What animated discussions sprang from a casual word,
and were pursued with a go and a spirit which seem to exist only on such
informal occasions.  Sometimes they laughed and quipped, and beheld
everything from the comic point of view; anon, a sudden spirit of
earnestness would pass from one to the other, and as the fading light
hid their faces from view, tongues were set free, so that they talked of
the things which mattered, the towering realities which lay at the heart
of life!  During these discussions Dan invariably seated himself in the
darkest corner, and Darsie, looking across, had again and again the
impression of deep eyes staring--staring!  Vie Vernon considered the
Percivals "grasping creatures," and didn't care who knew it; Hannah was
placidly unconcerned; Dan made no remark; Percy Lister was leaving
himself, and considered that things "fitted in well."  Altogether, in
comparison with the enthusiasm of the invitation, the opposition was
blightingly resigned.  Darsie tossed her head, packed her boxes, and
prepared to depart a whole three days sooner than she had originally
intended.

On the afternoon before her departure a party was made up for the rink,
but at the last moment Darsie excused herself, and declared a wish to
stay at home.  There were several pieces of sewing and mending which
were necessary, there was a letter to be written to Margaret France, and
a farewell ode to cheer poor Lavender.  A gas fire in her bedroom
allowed her to perform these tasks in solitude, but as soon as they were
satisfactorily accomplished she made her way downstairs to the study,
prepared to enjoy an hour over an interesting book.

The gas was unlit, the usual large fire blazed in the grate; an arm-
chair was drawn up to the side, and within it sat Dan, head leaning on
hand, in an attitude which spoke of weariness and dejection.

He raised his eyes and looked at her, and Darsie shut the door and came
forward eagerly.

"Dan!  Back again so soon?  Is anything wrong?"

"No!"

"But you look strange.  You--you didn't hurt yourself at the rink?"

"No."

"Quite, quite sure?"

"Quite."

Darsie subsided on to her favourite seat--the hearthrug--with a little
sigh of relief.

"That's all right.  You're very monosyllabic, Dan.  Shall I disturb you
if I sit here for a time?"

"No."

"A hundred thanks!  You are _too_ gracious.  I can be quiet if you like.
I like staring into the fire and dreaming myself."

Dan did not answer.  Darsie peered at him, moving her little head from
side to side so as to get the clearest view.  He looked very large--a
great shapeless mass of dark in the old red chair.

She liked the bigness of him, felt the old satisfaction at sight of the
strong, rugged face, the old craving for confidence and approval.
Strange how different one felt in company with different people.  _Tete-
a-tete_ with Ralph Percival, Darsie felt a giant of strength and
resource--assured, self-confident, a bulwark against which others might
lean.  With Dan, well, with Dan she was just a slip of a girl, conscious
of nothing so much as her own weaknesses, mental and physical; her
difficult gropings, compared with his clear vision; her tiny hands and
wrists, compared with his big sinewy paw; her slim form, compared to the
bulk of the square-cut shoulders.  Never--Darsie realised it with a
smile--never did she feel so humble and diffident as when in Dan's
society; yet, strangely enough, the sensation was far from disagreeable.

"Dan!"

"Darsie!"

"Is anything the matter?  Between you and me!  You don't happen to be
snarkey, do you, about anything I've done?"

"Why should you think I am `snarkey'?"

"Because--you _are_!  You're not a bit sociable and friendly--even
_your_ sort of sociability.  I'm a guest in your mother's house if I'm
nothing else and it's your duty to be civil."

"Haven't I always been civil to you, Darsie?"

Darsie drew a quick breath of impatience and, seizing upon the poker,
beat at the unoffending coal as the best method of letting off steam.

"You are so painfully literal.  I can _feel_ what other people are
thinking, however much they try to disguise it."

"How do _I_ feel, for example?"

Darsie turned her head and stared curiously into Dan's face.  The hand
on which it leaned shielded it somewhat from view, but, even so, there
was something in the intent gaze which filled her with a strange new
discomfort.  She turned back to her poking once more.

"I think--there's something that I don't understand--I think--there's
something you disapprove!  I'm a very good girl, and I work very hard,
and I'm fond of my friends, and I expect them to be fond of me in
return.  I don't _like_ you to disapprove, Dan!"

"I can't help it, Darsie.  I've hated that friendship from the
beginning, and I hate it more with every month that passes."

"Oh! _that_ old story."  Darsie's voice took a tone of impatience; for
it was annoying to find that Dan was harking back on the well-known
subject of dispute.  "Well, I'm sorry to distress you, but I am
conceited enough to believe that I have taken no harm from my friendship
with Ralph Percival, and that he has reaped some little good from mine.
While that state of thing continues, I shall certainly refuse to give
him up--even to please you!"

There was silence for several moments, then Dan said slowly--

"If I agreed with your conclusions, I should not try to persuade you,
Darsie; but I do not, and my opportunities of judging are better than
yours."

"You are unfair, Dan.  It is a pity to allow yourself to be so
prejudiced that you can't give a fair judgment.  I should have imagined
that even you would be forced to admit that Ralph had done better this
term."

Dan did not speak.  He turned his head and looked Darsie full in the
eyes, and there was in his look a puzzled, questioning air, which she
found it difficult to understand.  When he spoke again, it was not to
reply in any direct way to her accusation, but to ask a question on his
own account.

"Darsie, do you mind telling me--is your position entirely
disinterested?  Do you look upon the fellow merely as a man to be
helped, or do you care for him for his own personal sake?"

Darsie deliberated.  The firelight played on her downcast face, on the
long white throat rising from the low collar of her white blouse, on the
little hands clenched round the steel poker.  Before her mind's eye
arose the memory of handsome, melancholy eyes; imagination conjured back
the sound of impassioned appeals.  Her expression softened, her voice
took a deeper note.

"He needs me, Dan!"

That was her answer.  Dan nodded in silence, accepting it as sufficient.
He rose from his chair, and paced up and down the room, hands thrust
deep into his trouser pockets, head held back with the characteristic
forward tilt of the chin.  Darsie, watching him, thought involuntarily
of a caged animal striving restlessly against the bars.  Her heart gave
a little throb of relief when he spoke again in his own natural voice.

"All right, Darsie.  Good luck to your efforts!  I appreciate your
intentions, and am only sorry that I can't agree.  According to my
belief no one can help a man who refuses to help himself.  We've got to
fight our own battles, and to bear our own burdens!  If some one steps
forward and offers to undertake for us, we may imagine for a time that
we are set free, but it's a mistake!  Sooner or later the time comes
when we're bound to fight it out alone, and it doesn't get easier for
being deferred.  Everything that is worth learning in life we have to
worry out for ourselves!"

Darsie drew a long, trembling sigh.  How puzzling life was, when the two
people on whose judgment you most relied delivered themselves of
directly opposing verdicts!  Mrs Reeves believed that her help was all-
important to Ralph's progress; Dan insisted that her efforts were in
vain.

Was he right?  Was he wrong?  Could she honestly assure herself that
Ralph was stronger, more self-reliant, more able to stand alone without
the stimulus of constant support and encouragement?  Instinctively
Darsie's hand went up to touch the little golden brooch which fastened
the lace collar of her blouse.  If the anchor were withdrawn, would
Ralph drift once more towards the rocks?  The answer was difficult.  She
pondered it aloud, speaking in low, anxious tones, with lengthened
pauses between the words.

"We're both right, Dan.  We've both got hold of _bits_ of the truth!  In
the end we must win through for ourselves, but surely, in preparation
for the battle, we can give each other _some_ help.  Some natures seem
made to stand, and others to lean.  A prop is not of much account, but
it may serve to keep a plant straight while it is gathering strength.
The big oaks need no props; they are so strong that they can't
understand; they have no pity for weakness."

Dan stopped short in his pacings.

"That meant for me, Darsie?"

"Humph!  Just as you please!  Oaks are nice things--big, and strong, and
restful, but just a little bit inclined to grow--_gnarled_!"

Dan vouchsafed no reply, and Darsie sat, hands clasped round knees,
staring into the fire for five long, silent minutes.  She was hoping
that Dan would never grow "gnarled" towards herself, longing for him to
speak and promise that he would not, but he still remained silent, and
presently the door burst open, the rinking party appeared on the
threshold, and the opportunity for quiet conclave was over.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

NEW YEAR'S EVE.

Seated alone in the train, _en route_ for her visit to the Percivals,
Darsie had time to think in a more quiet and undisturbed fashion than
had been possible in the past bustling days, and a disagreeable feeling
of apprehension arose in her mind as she recalled the wording of the
three invitations.  In each was present the same note of depression, the
same hint of trouble in connection with the son of the house.  Could
anything have happened of which she was unaware?  No letter from The
Manor had reached her for some weeks past, but letters were proverbially
scarce at Christmas-time, so that it would be foolish to argue ill from
that fact alone.  Darsie braced herself physically and mentally, squared
her shoulders, and resolutely dismissed gloomy thoughts.

Noreen and Ralph met her at the station, looking reassuringly cheerful
and at ease a magnificent new motor stood in waiting outside, with a
cart for the luggage.  Inside the beautiful old house the atmosphere was
warmed by hot pipes, and scented with the fragrance of hothouse plants,
banked together in every corner.  It was not the usual case of being
warm and cosy inside a room, and miserably chilled every time one
crossed a passage or ascended the stairs.  Mrs Percival and the girls
were marvels of elegance in Parisian gowns, Ralph looked his handsomest
in knickerbocker suit and gaiters, and the servants moved noiselessly to
and fro, performing their tasks with machine-like accuracy.

Extraordinary how complete a change of scene may take place between
lunch and tea!  How swiftly a new atmosphere makes the old unreal!

As Darsie sat drinking her tea in the old wainscoted hall, it seemed
impossible to realise that such things as poverty and struggle were in
existence; even the shabby bustle and squeeze of her own dear home
became incredible in the face of this spacious, well-ordered calm!

Mrs Percival made no attempt at private conversation, and showed no
trace of "ulterior motive" in manner or conversation, which was a huge
relief to Darsie's mind.  She was not in a mood for serious
conversation; what she wanted was the usual Percival offering of praise,
admiration, and petting, and this was bestowed upon her with even more
than the usual generosity.  The grey-whiskered old Squire kissed her on
both cheeks; the girls assured her that she was prettier than ever, and
greeted her feeblest sallies with bursts of delighted laughter.  Ralph
gazed at her with adoring eyes; it was all, as Darsie had been wont to
remark, most grateful and comforting!

The first evening passed pleasantly enough, though there was a
noticeable effort on the part of each member of the family to keep the
conversation from touching upon the subject of Ralph's affairs.  Any
reference to Cambridge was taboo, as Darsie swiftly discovered, but
there were many points of interest left, which were both pleasant and
amusing to discuss.

The next morning--the last morning of the year--broke fine and bright,
and the view seen through the long windows of the dining-room was almost
as beautiful as in summer itself.  The park showed the same stretch of
velvet green, a belt of evergreens and tall Scotch firs filled up the
far distance, while the leafless boughs of elms and beeches made a lace-
like tracery against the sky.  To the right the old cedar stood calm and
unmoved, as it had stood while generations of Percivals had lived, and
loved, and sorrowed, and died.

When breakfast was over--and breakfast in the country is a meal which
pursues a calm and leisurely course--the four young people strolled into
the porch to discuss the programme for the day.

"Darsie is nerving herself to look at the horses' tails!" said Ida
laughingly.  It was a Percival peculiarity, agreeable or irritating
according to the mood of the hearer, that they never by any chance
forgot a remark, but continually resurrected it in conversation for
years to come.  Never a morning had Darsie spent at the Manor that she
had not been reminded of scathing comments on the habit of daily visits
to kennels and stables, as delivered by herself on the occasion of her
first visit.  To-day, however, she had only time to grimace a reply,
before Ida continued cheerfully--

"You won't be asked, my dear!  We have something far more important on
hand.  You have walked right into the jaws of the tenants' annual New
Year's treat, and will have to tire your hands decorating all the
morning, and your gums smiling all the evening.  It's an all-day-and-
night business, and we get home at cock-crow in a state of collapse--"

"It's held in the village hall," Noreen took up the tale, slipping
unconsciously into what Darsie called her "squire's-eldest-daughter-
manner."

"Quite a nice building.  We make it look festive with wreaths and
bunting.  They think so much of decorations!"  ("They" in Percival
parlance alluded to the various tenants on the estate.) "We try to think
of something novel each year as a surprise.  They like surprises.  We've
arranged with half a dozen girls to be there to help.  Quite nice girls,
daughters of the principal farmers.  You must be _quite_ sweet to them,
Darsie, please!  It is our principal meeting of the year, and we make a
point of being friendly."

"Must I really?"  Darsie assumed an expression of dejection.  "What a
disappointment!  It's so seldom I get an opportunity of being proud and
grand.  What's the good of staying at a Manor House, and driving down
with `the family,' if I have to be meek and friendly like any one else?
Couldn't you introduce me as the Lady Claire, and let me put on airs for
a treat?  It would act as a contrast to your `friendly ways,' and make
them all the more appreciated."

The girls laughed as in duty bound, and declared that it _would_ be
sport, and wondered if they dared, but Ralph sharply called them to
order.

"Rot!  As if everybody in this neighbourhood didn't know Darsie by
heart!  Put on your hats, and don't talk rubbish.  It will take us all
our time to get through with the hall before lunch."

Town-bred Darsie privately hoped that the motor would appear to carry
the helpers to the hall three miles away, but the Percivals themselves
never seemed to dream of such a possibility.  In short skirts and thick
boots they plodded cheerfully across boggy meadows and muddy lanes,
climbed half a dozen stiles, and arrived at last in the High Street of
the little village, close to the entrance of the unpretentious wooden
building which called itself the Village Hall.

Darsie thought that she had never beheld an interior which seemed so
thoroughly to need, and at the same time to defy, decoration!
Whitewashed walls, well splashed by damp; a double row of pegs all round
the walls at a level of some five or six feet from the ground; wooden
forms, and a small square platform, made up a whole which was bare and
ugly to a degree.

A group of five or six girls stood beside a pile of evergreens; a youth
in shirt-sleeves was in process of unpacking crumpled flags and
flattened Japanese lanterns from an old tin box; two ladders stood
against the walls.

The entrance of "the family" was marked by a general movement among the
little company, and Darsie watched the greetings which ensued with
twinkling amusement.

Noreen and Ida were _so_ pleasant, _so_ full of gratitude for the
presence of each individual helper, _so_ anxious to be assured that they
could _really_ spare the time.  Ralph was so laboriously polite, while
the girls themselves, pleasant, kindly, and well-educated, were either
happily unaware of the thinly disguised patronage, or had the good
manners to conceal their knowledge.  There was no doubt which side
appeared to best advantage in the interview!

"The first thing we must do is to decide upon a scheme of decoration,"
Ida declared.  "Darsie, suggest something!  You have never done it
before, so your ideas ought to be novel.  What can we do to make the
hall look pretty and cheerful?"

"Rebuild it!" was Darsie's instant and daring reply, whereat the
farmers' daughters laughed _en masse_, and the Percivals looked
haughtily displeased.

"Father built it!"

"Awfully good of him!  _And_ wicked of his architect.  I shan't employ
him to build my house!"

"I think," said Noreen loftily, "that we had better confine ourselves to
discovering the scheme of decoration.  It is too late to interfere with
the structure of the hall.  We generally make wreaths and fasten them to
the gas brackets, and drape the platform with flags."

"Then we may take it as settled that we _won't_ do that to-day.  What
happens to the pegs?"

"They hang their things on them, of course--hats, and coats, and
mufflers--"

"That _must_ be decorative!  How would it be to make them leave their
wrappings at the entrance to-night, or put them under their own chairs,
and to arrange a broad band of holly round the room so as to hide the
pegs from view?  It would be so easy to tie on the branches, and it
would have quite a fine frieze effect."

"`Mrs Dick, you are invaluable!'" quoted Ralph gaily.  "It's a ripping
idea.  Let's set to at once, and try the effect."

No sooner said than done; the little band of workers spread themselves
over the room, and began the task of trying prickly holly branches to
the line of pegs in such fashion as to form a band about two feet deep,
entirely round the room.  Berries being unusually plentiful that year,
the effect was all the more cheery, and with the disappearance of the
utilitarian pegs the hall at once assumed an improved aspect.  A second
committee meeting hit on the happy idea of transforming the platform
into a miniature bower, by means of green baize and miniature fir-trees,
plentifully sprinkled with glittering white powder.  The flags were
relegated to the entrance-hall.  The Japanese lanterns, instead of
hanging on strings, were so grouped as to form a wonderfully lifelike
pagoda in a corner of the hall, where--if mischievously disposed--they
might burn at their ease without endangering life or property.  The
ironwork of the gas-brackets was tightly swathed with red paper, and the
bare jets fitted with paper shades to match.  From an artistic point of
view Darsie strongly opposed the hanging of the timeworn mottoes, "A
Hearty Welcome to All," "A Happy New Year," and the like, but the
Squire's daughters insisted that they liked to see them, and the
farmers' daughters confirming this theory, up they went, above the
evergreen frieze, the white cotton letters standing out conspicuously
from their turkey-red background.

It was one o'clock before the work was finished, and a tired and
distinctly grubby quartette started out on their three-mile return walk
across the fields.  Certainly country-bred folk were regardless of
fatigue!  "If I owned a motor I should _use_ it!"  Darsie said to
herself with a distinct air of grievance as she climbed to her own room
after lunch, and laid herself wearily on her couch, the while the
Percival trio trotted gaily forth for "just a round" over their private
golf-links.

The evening programme was to begin with a concert, alternate items of
which were to be given by the villagers and members of the surrounding
"families."

At ten o'clock refreshments were to be served, in adjoining classrooms,
and during the progress of the informal supper chairs and forms were to
be lifted away, and the room cleared for an informal dance, to be
concluded by a general joining of hands and singing of "Auld Lang Syne"
as the clock struck twelve.

The Percival ladies and their guests from the surrounding houses made
elaborate toilettes for the occasion.  The villagers were resplendent in
Sunday blacks, "best frocks" and bead chains, the small girls and boys
appearing respectively in white muslins and velveteen Lord Fauntleroy
suits; the Squire opened proceedings with expressions of good wishes,
interspersed with nervous coughs, and Noreen and Ida led off the musical
proceedings with a lengthy classical duet, to which the audience
listened with politely concealed boredom.

To Darsie's mind, the entire programme as supplied by "the families" was
dull to extinction, but to one possessing even her own slight knowledge
of the village, the contributions of its worthies were brimful of
interest and surprise.

The red-faced butcher, who, on ordinary occasions, appeared to have no
mind above chops and steaks, was discovered to possess a tenor voice
infinitely superior in tone to that of his patron, the Hon.  Ivor Bruce,
while his wife achieved a tricky accompaniment with a minimum of
mistakes; the sandy-haired assistant at the grocer's shop supplied a
flute obbligato, and the fishmonger and the young lady from the
stationer's repository assured each other ardently that their true loves
owned their hearts; two school-children with corkscrew curls held a
heated argument--in rhyme--on the benefits of temperance; and, most
surprising and thrilling of all, Mr Jevons, the butler from The Manor,
so far descended from his pedestal as to volunteer "a comic item" in the
shape of a recitation, bearing chiefly, it would appear, on the
execution of a pig.  The last remnant of stiffness vanished before this
inspiring theme, and the audience roared applause as one man, whereupon
Mr Jevons bashfully hid his face, and skipped--literally skipped--from
the platform.

"Who'd have thought it!  Butlers are human beings, after all!" gasped
Darsie, wiping tears of merriment from her eyes.  "Ralph, do you suppose
Jevons will dance with me to-night?  I _should_ be proud!"

"Certainly not.  He has one square dance with the mater, and that
finishes it.  You must dance with me instead.  It's ages since we've had
a hop together--or a talk.  I'm longing to have a talk, but I don't want
the others to see us at it, or they'd think I was priming you in my own
defence, and the mater wants to have the first innings herself.  We'll
manage it somehow in the interval between the dances, and I know you'll
turn out trumps, as usual, Darsie, and take my part."

Ralph spoke with cheerful confidence, and Darsie listened with a sinking
heart.  The merry interlude of supper was robbed of its zest, as she
cudgelled her brains to imagine what she was about to hear.  Ralph was
evidently in trouble of some sort, and his parents for once inclined to
take a serious stand.  Yet anything more gay and debonair than the
manner with which the culprit handed round refreshments and waited on
his father's guests it would be impossible to imagine.  Darsie watched
him across the room, and noted that wherever he passed faces brightened.
As he cracked jokes with the apple-cheeked farmers, waited assiduously
on their buxom wives, and made pretty speeches to the girls, no onlooker
could fail to be conscious of the fact that, in the estimation of the
tenants, "Master Ralph" was as a young prince who could do no wrong.

For reasons of his own, Ralph was tonight bent on ingratiating himself
to the full.  For the first half-hour of the dance he led out one
village belle after another, and it was not until waltz number five had
appeared on the board that he returned to Darsie's side.

"At last I've a moment to myself!  My last partner weighed a ton, at
least, and I'm fagged out.  Got a scarf you can put round you if we go
and sit out?"

Darsie nodded, showing a wisp of gauze, and, laying her hand on Ralph's
arm, passed with him out of the main room into the flag-decked entrance.
For the moment it was empty, the dancers having made _en masse_ in the
direction of the refreshment-tables.  Ralph looked quickly from side to
side, and, finding himself unobserved, took a key from his pocket and
opened a small door leading into the patch of garden at the back of the
hall.  The moonlight showed a wooden bench fitted into a recess in the
wall.  Ralph flicked a handkerchief over its surface, and motioned
Darsie towards a seat.

"It's clean enough.  I gave it a rub this morning.  You won't be cold?"

"Oh, no; not a bit."  Darsie wrapped the wisp of gauze round her
shoulders, and prepared to risk pneumonia with as little thought as
ninety-nine girls out of a hundred would do in a similar case.  The hour
had come when she was to be told the nature of Ralph's trouble; she
would not dream of losing the opportunity for so slight a consideration
as a chill!

Ralph seated himself by her side, rested an elbow on his knees, the
thumb and first finger of the uplifted hand supporting his chin.  His
eyes searched Darsie's face with anxious scrutiny.

"You didn't hear anything about me before you left Newnham?"

"Hear what?  No!  What was there to hear?"

Ralph averted his eyes, and looked across the patch of garden.  The
moonlight shining on his face gave it an appearance of pallor and
strain.

"Dan Vernon said nothing?"

"No!"  Darsie recalled Dan's keen glance of scrutiny, the silence which
had greeted her own remarks, and realised the reason which lay behind.
"Dan is not the sort to repeat disagreeable gossip."

"It's not gossip this time; worse luck, it's solid, abominable fact.
You'll be disappointed, Darsie.  I'm sorry!  I _have_ tried.  Beastly
bad luck being caught just at the end.  I was sent down, Darsie!  It was
just at the end of the term, so they sent me down for the last week.  A
week is neither here nor there, but the parents took it hard.  I'm
afraid you, too--"

Yes!  Darsie "took it hard."  One look at her face proved as much, and
among many contending feelings, disappointment was predominant--bitter,
intense, most humiliating disappointment.

"Oh, Ralph!  What for?  I hoped, I thought--you _promised_ me to be
careful!"

"And so I was, Darsie!  Give you my word, I was.  For the first half of
the term I never got anything worse than three penny fines.  It isn't a
deadly thing to stay out after ten.  And I was so jolly careful--never
was so careful in my life.  But just the night when it was most
important I must needs be caught.  You can't expect a fellow to get away
from a big evening before twelve.  But that's what it ended in--a big
jaw, throwing up all my past misdeeds, and being sent down.  Now you can
slang away."

But Darsie made no attempt to "slang."  With every word that had been
uttered her feelings of helplessness had increased.  Ralph had
apparently made little difference in his ways; he had only been more
careful not to be found out!  At the very moment when she had been
congratulating herself, and boasting of the good results of her
friendship, this crowning disgrace had fallen upon him.  No wonder Dan
had been silent; no wonder that he had looked upon her with that long,
questioning gaze!  The thought of Dan was singularly comforting at this
moment--strong, silent, loyal Dan, going forth valiantly to the battle
of life.  Darsie's little face took on a pinched look; she shivered, and
drew the thin scarf more tightly round her.  Her silence, the suffering
written on her face, hit Ralph more hardly than any anger; for the first
time something deeper than embarrassment showed itself in face and
voice.

"For pity's sake, Darsie, speak!  Say something!  Don't sit there and
look at me like that."

"But, Ralph, what is there to say?"  Darsie threw out her arms with a
gesture of hopelessness.  "I've talked so often, been so eloquent,
believed so much!  If this is the outcome, what more can be said?"

"I _have_ tried!  I _did_ want to please you!"

"By not being found out!  It's not much comfort, Ralph, to feel that
I've encouraged you in deception.  And all those nights when you stayed
out late, were you betting as usual--getting into debt?"

Ralph frowned.

"I've been beastly unlucky, never knew such a persistent run.  That's
the dickens of it, Darsie.  I haven't dared to tell the Governor yet,
but I positively must get hold of the money before the tenth.  I'm bound
to pay up by then.  It's a debt of honour."

Darsie's red lip curled over that word.  She sat stiff and straight in
her seat, not deigning a reply.  Ralph appeared to struggle with himself
for several moments, before he said urgently--

"The mater is going to talk to you.  She knows that you have more
influence with me than any one else.  It's true, Darsie, whatever you
may think--I should have drifted a lot deeper but for you.  When she
does, do your best for a fellow!  They'll be down on me for not having
told about this debt.  The Governor asked if there was anything else,
but upon my word I hadn't the courage to own up at that moment."

Still Darsie did not reply.  She was wondering drearily what she could
find to say when the dreaded interview came about; shrinking from the
thought of adding to the mother's pain, feeling a paralysing sense of
defeat; yet, at this very moment of humiliation, a ray of light
illumined the darkness and showed the reason of her failure.

Dan was right! no one could truly help a man without first implanting in
his heart the wish to help himself!  She had been content to bribe
Ralph, as a spoiled child is bribed to be good; had felt a glow of
gratified vanity in the knowledge that her own favour was the prize to
be won.  If the foundations of her buildings were unstable, what wonder
that the edifice had fallen to the ground?  The thought softened her
heart towards the handsome culprit by her side, and when she spoke at
last it was in blame of herself rather than of him.

"I'm sorry, too, Ralph.  I might have helped you better.  I rushed in
where angels fear to tread.  I gave you a wrong motive.  It should have
been more than a question of pleasing me--more even than pleasing your
parents...  Oh, Ralph, dear, you know--you know there is something
higher than that!--Is religion nothing to you, Ralph?  Don't you feel
that in wasting your life you are offending against God--against Christ!
Can't you try again with _that_ motive to help you?--I can't make light
of things to your people, but I can take part of the blame on myself.
If it is true that I have any influence over you, I have thrown it
away..."

Ralph laid his hand over the gloved fingers clasped together on Darsie's
knee.

"Don't say that!  Don't think that, Darsie.  I may be a rotter, but I'd
have been a hundred times worse if it hadn't been for you.  And don't
exaggerate the position: it's a pity to do that.  Every man isn't born a
Dan Vernon.  Most fellows only reach that stage of sobriety when they
are middle-aged.  It would be a pretty dull world if no one kicked over
the traces now and then in their youth.  What have I done, after all?
Slacked my work, helped myself to a bit more play and come down on the
Governor for an extra cheque now and again.  Lots of fellows come a
worse cropper than that--"

Darsie wondered if a "worse cropper" might not possibly be a less
serious ill than persistent slacking and irresponsibility; but now that
the bad news was out, Ralph was fast regaining his composure.

"I'll turn out all right yet, Darsie, you'll see.  The tenants like me.
I'll settle down and make a first-rate squire when my time comes.  And
I'll make up to you then for all this worry and bother."  For a moment
his voice was significantly tender, then the recollection of his present
difficulty swept over him once more, and he added hastily: "You'll--
you'll break it to the mater, won't you?  About that money, I mean.
She'll take it best from you--"

Darsie rose from her seat, and stood before him, tall and white in the
moonlight.

"No!" she said clearly.  "I will not.  You must make your own
confession.  Things have been made easy for you all your life, Ralph.
Now you must fight for yourself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ralph bore no malice; even his momentary irritation at finding himself,
as he considered, "left in the lurch," lasted but a few moments after
his return to the hall.  Darsie would rather have had it last a little
longer.  To see an unclouded face, to catch the echo of merry laughter
within ten minutes of a humiliating confession, seemed but another
instance of instability of character.  It seemed literally impossible
for Ralph to feel deeply on any subject for more than a few moments at a
time; nevertheless, such was the charm of his personality that she felt
both pleased and flattered when twelve o'clock approached and he came
smilingly forward to lead her to her place in the great ring encircling
the whole room.  "I must have you and mother--one on either side," he
said, and as they crossed the floor together Darsie was conscious that
every eye in the room followed them with a smiling significance.  The
young Squire, and the pretty young lady who was his sister's friend--a
nice pair they made, to be sure!  Every brain was busy with dreams of
the future, weaving romantic plans, seeing in imagination other scenes
like the present, with Darsie in the place of hostess.  She knew it,
divined instinctively that Ralph knew it too, felt the recognition of it
in the grip of Noreen's hand, in the tender pathos of Mrs Percival's
smile.  And once again Darsie wondered, and doubted, and feared and felt
the weight of invisible chains.  There are moments, however, when doubts
and fears are apt to be swept away in a rush of overwhelming emotions,
and one of those is surely the beginning of a new year.  To be young and
pretty; to be by general acceptance the queen of the evening--no normal
girl could help being carried away by such circumstances as these!  When
the last chime of the twelve rang slowly out, and the audience with one
accord burst into the strains of "Auld Lang Syne," Darsie's eyes shone
with excitement, and she returned with unction the pressure of Ralph's
fingers.

  "Then here's a hand, my trusty friend,
  And gie's a hand o' thine!"

The volume of sound swelled and sank, here and there a voice took a
husky tone; here and there an eye grew dim, but these belonged as a rule
to the patriarchs among the guests, for whom the past was full of tender
memories, for whom but a few more New Years could dawn.  Perhaps this
might be the last, the very last, they would live to see.  The young
folks shed no tears; they were not unconscious of the prevailing
emotion, but with them it found vent in a tingling expectation.  Life
lay ahead.  Life was to come.  What would life bring?

When the song ceased, and the linked circle broke up into separate
groups, Darsie, glancing up into Ralph's face, was surprised to see it
white and tense.  She smiled, half amused, half sad, bracing herself to
hear some emotional protest or vow for the future; but Ralph spake no
word.  Instead, he led her to a seat, bowed formally before her, and,
still with that white, fixed look, marched straight across the room to
his father.

Darsie's pulse quickened, her little teeth clenched on her lower lip,
she pressed her hands against her knee the while she watched the
eloquent scene.  Father and son faced each other; handsome man, handsome
youth, strangely alike despite the quarter of a century between their
respective ages; the Squire's face, at first all genial welcome and
unconcern, showing rapidly a pained gravity.  Ralph was speaking
rapidly, with an occasional eloquent gesture of the arm, obviously
recounting some facts of pressing importance to himself and his hearer,
as obviously pleading a cause.  With a thrill of excitement Darsie
leaped to the true explanation of the situation.  Fresh from the singing
of the New Year song, Ralph had not paused to consider conventions, but
then and there had hastened to make his confession in his father's ears.

"Governor!  I'm sorry!  I was a coward, and wouldn't own up.  I've been
playing the fool again, and have lost more money.  I owe over fifty
pounds, and it has to be paid up by the tenth of this month."

The Squire looked his son full in the face.

"Is that all the truth, Ralph, or only a part?" he asked quietly.  "Let
me hear the whole please, now that we are about it."

"That is the whole, sir.  There's nothing more to be told."

"The money shall be paid, but you must do something for me in return.
We can't talk here.  Come to my study when we get home!"

The Squire laid his hand on his son's shoulder with a momentary pressure
as he turned aside to attend to his guests, but Ralph lopped crestfallen
and discomfited.  It was one thing to blurt out a disagreeable
confession on the impulse of a moment, and another and very different
one to discuss it in cold blood in the privacy of a study.  In the
middle of the night, too!  Ralph shivered at the thought.  Why on earth
couldn't the Governor be sensible, and wait till next morning?  The
money would be paid--that was the main point--all the rest could wait.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

AT THE ORCHARD.

Ralph Percival spent a long hour alone with his father in the chill dawn
of that New Year's morn, and during its passing heard more stern home-
truths than he had ever before listened to from those indulgent lips.
The Squire had not insisted on any arduous work on his son's part: in
his heart he shared Ralph's theory that a man whose life is to be spent
looking after his own land has no need of much scholarly lore.  He must
be straight and manly, intelligent enough to understand and move with
the movements of the day, but not so intelligent as to grow discontented
with a circle of admirable, but somewhat humdrum, neighbours.  He must
be possessed of courteous and agreeable manners, able on occasion to
take the chair at a meeting, possibly even on a Bench, with credit to
himself and his family.

A 'Varsity education was obviously the best means of developing such
qualities, but who was going to bother his head as to the question of
honours or no honours?  There was no reason why the boy should slave as
if he had his living to make by sheer brain effort.  The Squire was
prepared to show the utmost leniency towards Ralph's scholastic efforts,
but that he should have persistently broken the rules, ignored warnings,
incurred gambling debts, and, crowning indignity of all, that he should
have been sent down, even for the last week of the term--that stabbed
the honest old countryman to his heart.

He said very little on the subject of his own feelings; such men are not
given to talk of themselves, but the tone of his voice was eloquent, and
Ralph winced before it.  It was a new experience for the spoilt son and
heir to hear any accents but those of love and appreciation from a
member of his own family, and the experience was unexpectedly bitter.
Who could have believed that the Governor would cut up so rough--could
deliver himself of such sledge-hammer judgments?  The card debts would
be paid, there was no question of that--every debt should be paid--and
Ralph should return to college with a clean sheet so far as money was
concerned, and with his handsome allowance undiminished--_for the
present_.  He himself must decide what would happen in the future.  The
Squire asked for no promises; he had had experience of the uselessness
of promises (the listener winced again at the significance of those
words); but Ralph must understand that any debts would be subtracted
from his own future allowance.  He must also understand that he was
expected to take his pass the following May.  There had been too much
shirking and running loose--now he must work for a change.  For his
parents' sake, his sisters' sake, he must make amends for the pain and
shame of the last weeks.

It was a painful scene for both father and son, but the charm of manner
which was the great secret of Ralph's popularity did not forsake him,
even in this hour of humiliation.  He made an ideal penitent--abashed,
yet manly, subdued and silenced, yet when the right moment came ready
with a few apt, quietly spoken words.

"Thank you, sir.  You are always generous.  I've made a beastly poor
return.  I hope this year may end better than it has begun."

Poor Ralph!  How little he guessed at that moment all that the year held
in store!  How little the father dreamed of the altered conditions with
which he would face another New Year's Day!  But so long as they both
lived it was good to remember that the interview had ended peacefully
and with a renewed sense of harmony, with a firm hand-grip and an
affectionate glance.

Ralph took his candle from a table in the hall and made his way quietly
up the oak staircase, and his father stood below and watched him go,
while his heart waxed tender within him.

His son--his only son!  He would give his heart's blood for the lad.
Had he been just, wise, prudent, in the words which he had said?  Had he
been stern enough?--too stern?  He was in a thousand minds about his own
conduct, but in only one as regards Ralph's.  The boy had taken his
dressing like a man.  How handsome he had looked as he stood to listen,
not flinching or hanging his head as an ordinary culprit would have
done, but drawn to his full height, with straight, fearless gaze.  With
what a frank air he had held out his hand for that farewell grasp!
Bless the boy! his heart was in the right place.  He would settle down,
and make a fine man yet.  Patience!  Patience!

And so when the family met again for a late breakfast that New Year's
morning there was no shadow visible on the horizon, and throughout the
remainder of Darsie's visit every day seemed given up to enjoyment, and
brought with it some fresh festivity.

Contrary to her expectation, the subject of Ralph's troubles was avoided
rather than sought, and it was only on the eve of her departure to
Newnham that mother and sisters broke the silence to urge in each case
the same request--

"See as much of Ralph as you can during these next six months!  Have a
little talk with Ralph now and again!  Show an interest in his work.
Let him see that you care.  We must all do our best to encourage him to
work!"

By all the members of the family it was taken for granted that Darsie's
interest in Ralph's future was equal to, if not greater than, their own;
they made no secret of their belief that her influence had the more
weight.  If Darsie had known a passing temptation to abandon her
efforts, it would have been impossible to do so in the face of such
unanimous appeals.

Well, it was good to be back in Newnham once more, to get to work again
after the lazy weeks, to wake up one's brains with tussles over Anglo-
Saxon texts, to wrestle with philology, instead of browsing over novels
and magazine tales.  The Divinity Schools were stuffy as ever, the men
on one side shutting up the windows with their usual persistence, while
the girls on theirs frowned and fumed; but the Chaucer lectures were
full of interest, and coaching assumed a keener interest as spring
advanced and the prospect of "Mays" drew near.  Last year both Darsie
and Hannah had gained second-class honours; this year they had
determined to gain firsts, or perish in the attempt.  With a second and
a first record for Mays there was a possibility--a dazzling
possibility--of firsts in the final Tripos.  When one thought of that it
seemed impossible to work too hard, to put _too_ much energy into one's
studies.  But the happy blending of work and play which characterises
Newnham life prevented industry from being carried to an exaggerated
extent.  The hour's informal dancing after dinner on Wednesday and
Saturday evenings seemed to quicken circulation and brain alike, and the
great Shakespeare Ball was a distinct fillip, although--or was it
_because_?--it involved some slackness for the preparation of costumes.

The short Easter vac. served but as a breathing-space, and then another
May term began with an unparalleled succession of fine and sunny days.
Everything seemed early this spring; trees and shrubs rushed into leaf,
a wealth of blossom gave a fairy-like beauty to the old-world gardens,
and in every youth and maid the spirit of the spring awoke also, and
called to them to come out to play.  This was the season for picnics,
for walks along the fields by the riverside, for boating, for bathing,
for garden teas, for breakfast parties at the Orchard, amidst the pink
and white wonder of the apple-blossom.

Darsie Garnett was fired with a desire to give an Orchard party on her
own account, the guests to be Hannah, Margaret France, her special
Fresher adorer (Marian White by name), Ralph Percival, Dan Vernon, two
agreeable Classics from King's; Mrs Reeves to play chaperon--just a
cheery little party of nine.  What could you wish for more?

Margaret, preternaturally solemn, opined that _ten_ would be a more
desirable number.  "Poor Mrs Reeves!  What has _she_ done?  Why not ask
some one to play about with _her_?  I can't bear to see a Lonely at a
picnic or to be interrupted myself!"

"It _might_ be judicious to invite Minerva!" agreed Darsie, twinkling,
and alluding to the Don who enjoyed the privilege of Mrs Reeves's
special friendship.  "Two chaperons!  What a character for propriety I
shall gain, to be sure!  They little know."

"They know perfectly well, but they are human creatures after all.
They've been young themselves, and they enjoy the Orchard!  Set to work
at once, my dear, and get out your invitations.  This weather can't
possibly last, and it's going to break my heart if it is wet."

But there was no sign of rain on that exquisite morning when at the
striking of six o'clock Darsie leaped out of bed, and thrust her ruffled
golden head out of the opened window.  A few feathery white clouds
served but to intensify the blueness of the sky; the air was soft and
sweet, the garden beneath was already bathed in sunlight.  Darsie gave a
little caper of delight.  Sunshine, a picnic, a pretty frock and hat
waiting to be worn, and one's very best friends to admire the result--
what healthy girl of twenty could fail to be happy under such
circumstances as these?

She sang as she dressed; she made little fancy steps, and three separate
pirouettes which would have delighted the heart of a terpsichorean
mistress.  One pirouette greeted the effect of the white dress; the
second, that of the wide straw hat, with its appropriate garland of
blossom; the third was partly in celebration of the combined effect, and
partly out of sheer inability to keep still.

Her toilette completed, Darsie repaired to Hannah's room and surprised
that tasteless young woman engaged in putting the final touches to her
own costume, in the shape of an abomination designated "a neck
arrangement," composed of the cheapest of machine lace and papery satin
ribbon.  Hannah jumped with dismay as a hand descended suddenly over her
shoulder, and tore this treasure from her grasp.

"No!" cried Darsie firmly.  "You are my childhood's friend, and I love
you dearly, but wear lace frills with a linen collar at my Orchard party
you--_shall not_!  Miserable woman!  Will you never learn how to dress?"

"I paid eleven-three for it, near the end of a term.  Thought I _would_
please you this time!  Hate the tickling stuff myself.  Some people are
never satisfied," grumbled Hannah, rummaging in her tie-box, but it
never occurred to her to dispute the decree.  On questions of toilette
Darsie's word was absolute.

The two girls descended the stairs together, and found the other three
members of the party awaiting them at the door, Margaret and the little
Fresher abeam with smiles, and even Minerva herself looking quite young
and skittish.  At moments like these it dawned upon the student mind
that even a don herself could occasionally enjoy a mixture of play with
her work.

At the river Mrs Reeves and the four men came forward to meet the
Newnham party, the canaders were ranged ready for the embarkment, and
Darsie felt the honours of her position press heavily, as the other
members of the party stood silently waiting for her to apportion the
crews.  The worst of it was that one felt obliged to take the least
desirable place oneself.  Considered as a don, Minerva had many points,
but when bound for a river picnic one did not exactly hanker after her
society.  Still, there it was.  Every position has its drawbacks.  The
row up the river on that exquisite morning was a joy independent of
society, and when the Orchard itself was reached it was undeniably
agreeable to sit at the head of the table, and play the gracious hostess
to one's guests.

Orchard appetites are proverbial, but this particular party claimed to
have broken all previous records.  Soon there was hardly a fragment of
food left on a plate.  The pile of banana-skins was positively startling
to behold; tea and coffee pots were drained, and drained again; requests
for milk and more milk threatened the supply of later guests, and the
birds in the trees overhead chattered not a whit more gaily than the
company around the board.

"Shop" was sternly forbidden as a subject of conversation, and the
remotest reference thereto was instantly booed into silence, for behind
all the lightsomeness of demeanour a weight of anxiety lay on each
heart.  The critical time was approaching when the result of the year's
work would be put to the test.  The two classics, as sons of a poor
clergyman, were acutely conscious of all that was involved by a first or
second class.  Ralph Percival was realising painfully the difficulty of
making up for years of slacking, or even of keeping up a spurt beyond a
few days at a time; the little Fresher trembled at the thought of her
first Mays; even Margaret France herself showed signs of nerves before
the ordeal of the Tripos, and on one tragic occasion had even been
discovered weeping hysterically upon her bed.

"C-c-couldn't remember a context," was her hiccoughing explanation of
the breakdown, and henceforth Darsie had taken her in hand, fagged for
her, petted her, scolded her, put her to bed, and ruthlessly carried off
notebooks to her own study, to frustrate disastrous attempts at midnight
toil.

As for Dan, he was a giant among pigmies.  Examinations had no terrors
for him; his place was assured.  When strangers visited Cambridge, their
sons and brothers pointed out his big, lumbering form in the streets,
and bade them remember Vernon--Vernon would arrive!  Darsie was
conscious that his presence lent distinction to her party, for Dan but
seldom appeared in the social world.

And he was behaving so well, too! taking part in the conversation, even
telling stories and capping anecdotes of his own accord, and behaving
quite amiably to Ralph.  Darsie beamed approval on him from the end of
the table, and deliberately singled him out as her companion for the
after-breakfast stroll.

"Come down to the river, Dan!  There's a tree with the most convenient
forked branch where one can sit hidden by the leaves and watch the
canaders come up.  Last year I heard some quite thrilling fragments of
conversation."

"I'll be wary of that tree," said Dan solemnly, but he helped Darsie to
her eyrie, and swung himself up beside her with an alacrity which showed
that the suggestion fell in well with his own wishes, and there they sat
like birds in a nest, smiling at each other with bright, friendly
glances.

"Isn't this fine?  No one saw us come, did they?  They'll think we're
lost.  I'm tired of being polite.  Thank you for coming to my party,
Dan, and for being so jolly."

"Thank you for asking me and for looking so--ripping!"  Dan cast an
appreciative glance at the white dress and blossom-wreathed hat.  "Glad
to see you're not knocking yourself up with too much work."

Darsie bent her head with a dubious air.

She wished to look well, but, on the other hand, a little sympathy would
not have been unwelcome.  "I'm excited this morning, and that gives me a
colour," she explained.  "If you could see me at the end of the day--I'm
so weak in my mediaeval French Grammar.  It haunts me at night--"

"Stop!" cried Dan warningly.  "Don't let it haunt you here, at any
rate--it would be a crime among this blossom.  Tell me a story as you
used to do in the old schoolroom days.  I haven't heard you tell a story
since that Christmas night when we all sat round the fire and burnt fir-
cones, and the light shone on your face.  You wore a white dress then.
You looked _all_ white."

"And you sat in the corner and glowered--I could see nothing, but I
_felt_ eyes.  That will be one of the times we shall remember, Dan, when
we look back on our young days--all together, and so happy and free.  I
had a melancholy turn during that cone-burning, one of the shadows that
fall upon one causelessly in the midst of the sunshine, but that was
only a bit of the happiness, after all.  It's rather wonderful to be
twenty, Dan, and never to have known a real big sorrow!  Most of the
girls here have come through something, some of them a great deal.  I
feel such a babe beside them.  It isn't good for one, I suppose, to have
things _too_ smooth."

"I hope they'll continue smooth for a long time to come.  You're too
young for troubles, Darsie," said Dan hastily.  He sat silent for a few
moments, his chin poking forward, his thin, expressive lips twitching as
if struggling with difficult speech.  A canader came gliding slowly by,
the man and girl occupants chatting gaily together, unconscious of the
watchers in the tree on the bank.  Their words fell absently on Darsie's
ear, she was waiting for what Dan had to say.

"When they _do_ come, you know you can depend on me.  I'm not much of a
hand at social life, so it's best to keep out of the way and let other
fellows chip in who can make a better show, but if there's anything
useful to be done, you might give me a turn.  We're very old friends."

Darsie gave him an affectionate glance.  "Indeed I will.  I should feel
you a tower of strength.  Thank you, dear Oak-tree."

"Thank you, Apple-blossom!" returned Dan quite gallantly, if you please,
and with a laugh which followed the passing seriousness vanished.

For the next half-hour they laughed and sparred, capped stories, and
made merry, more like a couple of happy children than hard-worked
students on the verge of examinations; and then, alas! it was time to
return to work, and, sliding down from their perch, Dan and Darsie
walked forward to assemble the scattered members of the party.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

DISASTER.

Cambridge May week is a function so well known, and so often described,
that it would be superfluous to enter in detail into its various
happenings.  In their first year Darsie and Hannah had taken little part
in the festivities, but upon their second anniversary they looked
forward to a welcome spell of gaiety.  Not only were the Percivals
coming up for the whole week, but Mr and Mrs Vernon and Vie were also
to be installed in rooms, and the Newnham students had received
permission to attend the two principal balls, being housed for the
nights by their own party.  Throughout Newnham the subject of frocks
became, indeed, generally intermingled with the day's work.  Cardboard
boxes arrived from home, cloaks and scarves were unearthed from the
recesses of "coffins," and placed to air before opened windows;
"burries" were strewn with ribbons, laces, and scraps of tinsel, instead
of the usual notebooks; third-year girls, reviving slowly from the
strain of the Tripos, consented languidly to have their hats re-trimmed
by second-year admirers, and so, despite themselves, were drawn into the
maelstrom.  One enterprising Fresher offered items of her wardrobe on
hire, by the hour, day, or week, and reaped thereby quite a goodly sum
towards her summer holiday.  A blue-silk parasol, in particular, was in
universal request, and appeared with _eclat_ and in different hands at
every outdoor function of the week.

In after-years Darsie Garnett looked back upon the day of that year on
which the Masonic Ball was held with feelings of tender recollection, as
a piece of her girlhood which was altogether bright and unclouded.  She
met the Percival party at one o'clock, and went with them to lunch in
Ralph's rooms, where two other men had been invited to make the party
complete.  There was hardly room to stir in the overcrowded little
study, but the crush seemed but to add to the general hilarity.

Ralph made the gayest and most genial of hosts, and the luncheon
provided for his guests was a typical specimen of the daring hospitality
of his kind!  Iced soup, lobster mayonnaise, salmon and green peas, veal
cutlets and mushrooms, trifle, strawberries and cream, and strong
coffee, were pressed in turns upon the guests, who--be it acknowledged
at once--ate, drank, enjoyed, and went forth in peace.  Later in the
afternoon the little party strolled down to the river, and in the
evening there was fresh feasting, leading up to the culminating
excitement of all--the ball itself.

Beside the Percivals' Parisian creations, Darsie's simple dress made but
a poor show, but then Darsie's dresses were wont to take a secondary
place, and to appear but as a background to her fresh young beauty,
instead of--as is too often the case--a dress _par excellence_, with a
girl tightly laced inside.  When she made her appearance in the sitting-
room of the lodgings, the verdict on her appearance was universally
approving--

"You look a _lamb_!" gushed Ida enthusiastically.

"How do you manage it, dear?  You _always_ seem to hit the right thing!"
exclaimed Mrs Percival in plaintive amaze; and as he helped her on with
her cloak, Ralph murmured significantly--

"As if it mattered what _you_ wore!  No one will notice the frock."

At the ball there was an appalling plethora of girls; wallflowers sat
waiting round the walls, and waited in vain.  Darsie felt sorry for
them, tragically sorry; but the sight of their fixed smiles could not
but heighten the sense of her own good luck in having the chance of more
partners than she could accept.  Ralph showed at his best that evening,
evincing as much care for his sisters' enjoyment as for that of their
friend.  Not until the three programmes were filled to the last extra
did he rest from his efforts, and think of his own pleasure.  It is true
that his pleasure consisted chiefly in dancing with Darsie, and their
steps went so well together that she was ready to give him the numbers
for which he asked.  As for Dan Vernon, he did not dance, but out of
some mistaken sense of duty, felt it his duty to put in an appearance
and _glower_.

"See old Vernon, glowering over there?" inquired Ralph, laughing, as he
whirled Darsie lightly by to the strains of an inspiriting two-step, and
for a moment a cloud shadowed the gaiety of her spirits.  Dan ought
either to dance or stay away!  She didn't _like_ to see him looking
glum!

The dancing was carried on until four in the morning, when in the chill
grey light the company were ranged in rows, and photographed, apparently
to provide a demonstration of how elderly and plain even the youngest of
the number could look under such inauspicious circumstances.

The three girls had breakfast in bed the next morning, somewhere about
twelve o'clock--a delightful occasion when all three talked at the same
time, relating thrilling experiences of the night before, comparing
notes, admiring, quizzing, shaking with laughter over a dozen innocent
drolleries.  These after-conferences are perhaps the best part of the
festivities of our youth; and Noreen, Ida, and Darsie began that fine
June day as gaily, as happily, as unconscious of coming ill as any three
girls in the land.

Ralph had been anxious that his people should again lunch in his rooms,
but Mrs Percival had prudently decided in favour of a simple meal at
home, and it was approaching tea-time when the party sallied forth to
witness the day's "bumping" on the river.  The elders were frankly tired
after their late hours, but the three girls looked fresh as flowers in
their dainty white frocks, and enjoyed to the full the kaleidoscopic
beauty of the scene.

The two Percivals' interest in the bumping was of the slightest
description--Ralph was not taking part this afternoon, and with Ralph
began and ended their concern.  They stood on the crowded bank, rather
hot, rather bored, amusing themselves by scanning the people near at
hand.  The Vernon party were but a few yards away, and Hannah attracted
special attention.

"She _is_ plain!" exclaimed Noreen; whereat Darsie snapped her up in
double-quick time.

"Of _course_ she is plain!  She wouldn't dream, of being anything else!"

Beloved plain Hannah!  No features, however classic, could be as
eloquent as hers in her old friend's eyes.  Darsie tossed her head, and
looked flusty and annoyed, whereat Noreen feebly apologised, emphasising
her offence by blundering explanations, and Ralph grew restless and
impatient.

"I say!  This is getting slow.  Come along, girls; let's take the ferry
and cross to the other side.  It's not half bad fun to see all the
shows.  It will be a change, anyhow, and you can come back when you're
tired."

"I'll stay with mother," Noreen decided dutifully.  Ida surveyed the
crowd on the opposite bank with the dubious air of one who has lived all
her life within her own gates.  "I don't _think_ I care to go into that
crush."

"Oh, come along, Darsie.  Thank goodness you're not so squeamish.  Let's
get out of this."  Ralph pushed impatiently forward, and Mrs Percival
turned to Darsie, with raised eyebrows, and said urgently--

"Do go, dear!  Ralph will take care of you.  We will wait for you here."

Darsie smiled assent, the thought passing lightly through her mind that
Mrs Percival looked particularly sweet and gracious when she smiled.
She never dreamt that that particular smile, that little glance of
appeal, were to remain with her all heir life, to be her comfort in a
bitter grief.

They passed the spot where Hannah and Dan were standing with their
friends, and acting on a sudden impulse, Darsie turned her head, with a
few laughing words of explanation: "We're going to look at the Punch and
Judies!"

There was no definite response, but Hannah's exclamation had an envious
tone which made Ralph quicken his footsteps.  It was rare good luck to
get Darsie to himself for an hour; he certainly did not wish to be
saddled with plain Hannah as an unwelcome third.

The ferry-boat was on the point of starting, its flat surfaces crowded
with pleasure-seekers.  Ralph and Darsie had to run the last few yards
in order to secure a bare space for standing.  Ralph took the outside
with the nonchalance of the true boating-man, who would almost as soon
fall in the water as not.  Darsie, standing close by his side, glanced
from one to the other of her companions, her never-failing interest in
_people_ discovering a story in each new group.

They had reached the middle of the stream, when a movement of the deck
upset her balance, and sent her swaying against Ralph's arm.  She looked
up with a laughing apology, and was startled by the sight of his face.
So far was he from sharing her amusement, that never in the course of
their acquaintance had she seen him so pale, so set.  He seized the hand
she had laid on his arm, and held it in a vice-like grip, as he bent to
look at the deck.  At that moment Darsie stumbled afresh, and felt the
lapping of water against her thinly clad feet.  She exclaimed loudly,
but her voice was drowned in the chorus of cries, questions, and appeals
which arose from every side.

How swiftly, with what incredible, paralysing speed a scene may change,
and seeming security give way to panic fear!  Darsie, turning her head
to look at the crowd of faces which towered so strangely above her, met
but one expression in every eye--breathless, agonising dread.

Looking back upon the scene in after-life, it seemed the nightmare of a
moment; then the grip upon her arm tightened, she felt herself being
pushed past Ralph towards the edge of the boat, heard his voice speaking
to her in crisp, firm tones which she had heard in dreams, but never,
never from his living lips.

"Darsie!  She's turning turtle!  There's no danger, darling, if you jump
clear.  The water's not deep.  Some one will come.  I'm going to throw
you in.  Strike out for your life!"

She was lifted like a doll in his strong arms; her wild eyes, searching
his, met a cheery smile in response, she felt herself swayed to and fro,
realised with a shudder the parting from the firm grasp--fell, splashed,
felt the water close over her head.

When she rose to the surface the water near her seemed full of
struggling forms; she caught a terrified glimpse of a perpendicular
deck, of passengers falling like flies from their perch, and with the
instinct of despair struck out in the opposite direction.

Like most Newnham girls, she was a fair swimmer--happy hours spent in
the swimming-tent had ensured so much; but it was her first experience
of fighting the water in all the crippling fineries of race-week attire.
Her shoes, her skirts, the floating ends of sash and scarf all held her
down; her soaking hat flopped over her eyes, her very gloves seemed to
lessen the force of her stroke; but breathless and spent as she was, she
could not pause while from behind arose that dread, continued cry.
Ralph had told her to strike out, that there was no danger if only she
kept clear.

"All right, Darsie--all right!  Keep calm--keep calm!  I'm coming!  I've
got you!  Leave yourself to me."

It was Dan's voice speaking in her ear, clear and distinct in the midst
of the clamour; she felt herself seized in scientific fashion--in the
way at which she herself had played at rescuing her companions from
imaginary death--and, relinquishing all effort, was towed numbly to the
shore.

It seemed as if hundreds of people were waiting to rescue her; hundreds
of arms stretched out in welcome; hundreds of eyes grew suddenly moist
with tears.  She was tired, and wet, and dazed, but she could stand on
her own feet, had no need of helping arms.  Dan took her hand in his and
ran swiftly across the grass to the nearest tent, where already
preparations were in train for the restoration of the unfortunates.

Darsie was the first of the crew to reach this shelter, and Mrs
Percival and the girls awaited her tearfully on the threshold.  She
awoke to fuller consciousness at sight of their faces, smiled in
reassurement, and murmured disjointed phrases.

"Quite all right--only wet!  Ralph saved me!  A second time!  So calm
and brave!"

"Yes, dear child; yes!  Take off that wet hat!" replied Mrs Percival
urgently, the girl's praise of her son adding to her tender solicitude,
and she hovered around with tender touches, the while from around rose a
ceaseless string of suggestions.

"Brandy!  Hot tea!"  "She ought to change at once!"  "My house is just
at hand--do come to my house!"  "My motor is waiting outside!  Let me
drive you home!"

So on, and so on, innate kindliness of heart bubbling to the surface as
it invariably does in moments of disaster.  As each unfortunate entered
the tent the same programme was enacted, the same kind offices
volunteered.  "My house is close at hand--do come to my house!"

"My motor is waiting--do let me drive you back!"  Each victim of the
immersion wore at first the same dazed, helpless expression, but the
presence of their companions, the kindly voices speaking in their ear,
the hot, reviving draughts soon brought about a change of mood, so that
they began to smile, to exchange remarks, to congratulate themselves on
escape.  Darsie, with characteristic elasticity, was one of the first to
regain composure, and the Percivals hung delightedly on her description
of Ralph's composure and resource.

"I was terrified.  It was a dreadful sensation to feel the deck sinking
beneath your feet on one side, and to see it gradually rising above you
on the other.  And all the bewildered, terrified faces!  Ralph never
turned a hair.  He told me that there was no danger so long as I kept
clear of the boat; he lifted me up in his arms as if I had been a doll."

The colour mounted to Darsie's white cheeks as she spoke, and a thrill
of emotion tingled her blood.  The first time she hears herself
addressed as "darling" in a man's deep voice is one that a girl cannot
lightly forget.  She turned her head over her shoulder so as to be able
to see the entrance into the tent.

"Where _is_ Ralph?"

"He will be here presently.  None of the men have come in yet.  Ralph
will be so useful.  He is as much at home in the water as on land.  He
will be busy helping the others."

Mrs Percival spoke with happy assurance; nevertheless, she left
Darsie's side and edged her way through the crowd towards the open
doorway, through which she ought now to be able to see her son's return.
As she was within a few yards of the entrance it was suddenly blocked
by a group of men--hatless, dripping, dishevelled, but in demeanour
composed and cheery, as if what had happened had been quite an enjoyable
experience.

The foremost of the group greeted their friends with smiles and waving
of hands.

"Hullo!  Hullo!  Here we are!  How are you feeling?  All serene now?
Every one comfortably on shore?  Got any tea left?"

"Is my son with you?  Have you seen my son--Ralph Percival?"

Mrs Percival spoke in a high, clear voice, at the sound of which a
young undergrad. wheeled round quickly towards his companions.

"By Jove--yes!  He was on board.  I thought we were all here.  Where's
Percival?"

He dashed out of the tent, stood looking blankly around, turned a
blanched face towards the tent.

Then from an inner corner of the tent another voice questioned sharply:
"Mary!  Where's Mary--Mary Everard?  She was with us--standing quite
near.  _Mary's not here_!"

No one answered.  There was a breathless silence, while each man and
woman in that crowded tent was subtly, overpoweringly conscious of a new
presence filling the atmosphere around--the presence of _Fear_!  Heavy
as a palpable presence it pressed upon them; it lapped them round; the
fumes of it mounted to their brains.

Months before, Darsie had listened while a woman who had been near San
Francisco at the time of the earthquake and fire endeavoured to describe
what was in truth indescribable, how the very air itself was at that
time charged with a poignancy of agony--an impalpable spiritual agony,
apart from such physical cause as heat and fire, an agony which arose
from the grief of thousands of tortured hearts.

She had listened--interested, curious, pleased to nestle in her easy-
chair, and ponder over a novel thought; but at this terrible moment she
had no need to ponder; realisation came sharp and sure.  Tragedy was in
the air; she inhaled it with every breath, tasted it, felt its heavy
hand.

With one accord the occupants of the tent streamed across the lawns
towards the waterside, where even now an informal inquiry was taking
place.  The officials in charge of the ferry-boat were defending
themselves against their accusers.  Overcrowded?  The ferry-boat had
been as crowded on two previous days, and all had gone well.  It was
impossible to account for the accident.  Since no further harm than a
few minutes' ducking had happened to the passengers, the greater loss
was on their own side.

To these officials, protesting, excusing, arrived in a mass a body of
white-faced men and women, demanding with one voice their lost--a young
man, an undergraduate; tall, fair, in a white flannel suit; last seen
standing on the side of the boat helping to lower the women into the
water; a young girl, in a boating-dress of blue and white.  They were
not among the rescued.  They had not been seen since the moment of the
accident.

_Where were they_?

As Darsie stood, ghastly and shuddering, by the water brink, she was
subconsciously aware of a strong arm in hers.  Subconsciously also she
was aware that the arm belonged to Dan Vernon, but she had no time for
look or word; her whole being was strung to one agonising thought.  Mr
Percival supported his half-fainting wife; the two sisters clung
together; the relations of Mary Everard paced wildly to and fro.  On
shore all was tumult and confusion, on the river sunbeams sparkled, the
stream was quiet and undisturbed.

"Percival was like a fish: Percival could have kept afloat for hours."

A voice separated itself from the confused babel, and struck on Darsie's
ear, but even as her heart leaped upward another voice spoke.  "It is
not a case of swimming.  If he were not quick enough in getting away--if
he were caught beneath--penned!"

The strong arm gripped her more firmly still, steadied her trembling.  A
fierce voice issued an order for "Silence!  Silence!"

Margaret France came up with beautiful soft eyes and a beautiful soft
voice.  She spoke wise, tender words.  You were to come away--it was
better so.  It would add to your friends' distress if you were ill.  You
were wet, cold.  You were to be sensible and come home.

Darsie looked at her thoughtfully for a long moment.  She was thinking
that she loved Margaret France, that she had taken a fancy to her the
first evening at Newnham.  How droll and witty she had been as an
auctioneer!  Of the purport of her present words she had no
comprehension.  She sighed and turned her face to the river.

"Leave her to me," said Dan's voice quietly.  "I will take care of her."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

They found them at sundown; the two young, fair bodies--the tall, pale
lad, the slim, dark maid--two cold effigies of youth, and health, and
joy.  On Ralph's forehead was a deep red mark, the mark of the blow
which had given him a prey to the waters; but Mary's brown locks floated
round a sweet, untroubled face.

They bore them to the mortuary, and those who loved them sat and wept
alone.  Darsie spent the two following days with the stricken family,
who found their one comfort in listening again and again to the story of
Ralph's brave end.  Weak and unstable in life, in death he had shown a
gallant front, and more than one of the unfortunate crew came forward to
testify to his courageous and selfless efforts on their behalf.

Mr Percival went about with a set face and shoulders bowed like those
of an old man.  The girls wept helplessly from morn till night; Mrs
Percival lost in one night all lingering trace of youth; she kept up
bravely before her husband and daughters, but alone with Darsie her
anguish found vent.

"My son, my son!  He was so good to me--so loving and kind.  His faults
were the faults of youth, and, oh, Darsie, my, faults also!  We blamed
him for faults which we had not tried to check.  If he had lived and had
been obliged to face life for himself he would have risen to it, as he
rose to that last great chance.  It takes a brave man to face death
calmly.  He was not weak or selfish then--my Ralph!  No one dared call
him weak.  Thank God!  We were with him to the end, we were happy
together, and you were with him too.  That is what he would have wished.
He loved you, Darsie.  If he had lived, he would have wished you for
his wife."

"Yes!" sighed Darsie, and laid her head gently on the other's knee.  In
the silence which followed she was acutely aware of the unspoken
question which filled the air, acutely distressed that she could not
give the stricken mother the assurance for which she craved.

In Ralph's lifetime his friendship had brought Darsie as much pain as
joy, and, though death had wiped away all but tender recollections, even
in this hour of grief and shock she did not delude herself that she
sorrowed for him with the deepest sorrow of all.  The anxious, pitiful
affection which she had felt for the man who leaned so heavily upon her
was more that of a sister than a wife.

Darsie stretched out her hand, found the chilly one of the poor mother,
and leaning her soft cheek over it, pressed it tenderly with her lips.

"You must let me be your third daughter!  We can talk about him
together.  I can tell you about this last year--every little tiny thing
that he said and did.  You'll never be anxious about him any more, dear,
never afraid!  You will always be proud of your hero boy."

Mrs Percival sighed.  She was in too sensitive a mood not to realise
the meaning of the girl's lack of response, but the first pang of
disappointment was followed by a thought full of comfort to the sore
mother-heart.

"I loved him best.  He was mine to the end!  No one loved him like his
mother!"



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

BRIGHTER DAYS.

Six months passed by--months of grief and pain, and bitter, unavailing
regret; of work and play, of long summer days, and wintry fog and cold;
of reviving happiness also, since, thank God! joy returns like the
spring, bringing back hope and joy to a darkened world.  There was a
place in Darsie's heart which would ever be consecrated to the memory of
Ralph; but _it_ was not a foremost place--that most crushing of sorrows
had been spared her; and when one not yet twenty-one is living the
healthiest and most congenial of lives, and is above all elevated to the
proud position of third-year girl, it would be as unnatural as wrong to
dwell continually upon a past grief.

At first Darsie felt shocked and ashamed when the old gay mood swept her
off her balance, and she found herself dancing, singing, and making
merry as of yore, but her two mentors, Mrs Reeves and Hannah Vernon,
united to combat this impression.

"To bear a sorrow _cheerfully_ is the only resignation worthy of the
name!"  This was the older woman's verdict; the younger preached the
same precept in student vernacular--

"Why grizzle when you want to smile?  Pray, what good can you do
yourself, or any one else, by going about with a face like a fiddle?
Remember Margaret France, and don't block up the window to shut out the
stars!  Let them twinkle for all they are worth, the blessed little
things.  They are _tired_ of hiding behind the clouds.  You have a duty
to the living as well as to the dead; remember that!"

Yes, it was true.  Looking back over the last eight months Darsie
realised what a debt of gratitude she owed to relations and friends
alike for their tenderness and forbearance.  It had been hard on the
home party to have the summer holidays clouded by the presence of a
mourner who shuddered at the sight of water, collapsed into tears at
unexpected moments, and lived in a condition of super-sensitiveness,
ready as it seemed to be hurt by the most innocent word; yet how gentle
and patient they had been, every single one of them, down to Tim
himself!  Mother and father, of course, had been angels; one took it for
granted that they would be, but who could have believed in such
consideration from the boys and girls.  Dear old Clemence!  What a
comfort she had been!  Darsie had often been inclined to think that, for
sheer rest and soothing, no one could compete with a plump, practical,
matter-of-fact sister, who had no thought for "ifs" or "whys," but was
full of care to ensure your present physical well-being.  Then, if for a
moment Clemence seemed to fall short, there was Lavender, ready to pour
out floods of sympathy, to mingle her tears with yours, and listen to
endless reminiscences.  As for the boys, Harry and Russell forbore to
tease, affected blindness to reddened eyes, and said, "Buck up, old
girl!" with real heartiness of feeling, while Tim was assiduous in the
offer of sticky sweets.

The Vernons, lucky creatures! went off _en masse_ to Switzerland for
July and August.  Darsie morbidly told herself that they were anxious to
avoid the depression of her own presence during the chief holiday of the
year.  She was, as she expressed it, "too proud to say so," but the
inward soreness made her so cold and abrupt in manner that her friends
had good cause to reverse the accusation.

With regard to Dan Vernon in especial there was a soreness at Darsie's
heart.  During the first days after the tragic happening Dan had been a
tower of strength, always at hand to comfort, support, and take every
difficulty upon his own shoulders.  To outward appearance Darsie had
appeared oblivious of his presence, but subconsciously she had leaned on
his strength with a profound relief.  It was hard to have Dan withdraw
into his shell just as she was beginning to long for his presence; but
he _had_ withdrawn, and like most naturally shy and reticent people,
withdrawn farther than ever, as if in reaction from his unusual
demonstration.

In hall itself the absence of Margaret France made a big blank.  Having
passed her tripos with a first class, Margaret had placidly returned
home to help her mother in the house, and take part in an ordinary
social life.  "What a waste!" cried her Newnham acquaintances, but
Margaret's friends, remembering her own words on the subject, believed
that she had chosen the better part.

With October came the return to Newnham, and for the first few weeks an
access of grief and depression.  It was hard to fall into the old life
shorn of its greatest interest, to be reminded of Ralph at every turn,
to see his friends pass by, laughing and gay, while his place was blank.

Then it was that Darsie discovered the real tenderness of heart which
lies beneath the somewhat callous exterior of the college girl.
Freshers, second-year girls, even austere thirds themselves, combined to
surround her with an atmosphere of kindness and consideration.  No
_word_ of sympathy was ever spoken, but almost every hour of the day
brought with it some fresh deed of comfort and cheer.  Offerings of
flowers, tendered by a friend, or laid anonymously on "burry" or coffin;
bags of fruit and cake, invitations galore, surprise visits to her own
study, each in turn bringing a gleam of brightness to the day.  Plain
Hannah, too, dear old plain Hannah!  In the midst of her grief Darsie
was filled with amusement at Hannah's unique fashion of showing her
sympathy.  Hot water evidently commended itself to her mind as the ideal
medium, for at a dozen hours of the day and night the door of Darsie's
study would open and Hannah would appear on the threshold, steaming can
in hand.  Early morning, eleven o'clock, before lunch, before tea,
before dinner, before cocoa, before bed, Hannah and her can never failed
to appear.  For the first half of the Michaelmas term Darsie might
literally have been described as never out of hot water.

And now it was the Lent term; eight months had passed by since the date
of Ralph's death, and it surely behoved Darsie to rise above her
depression, and to throw herself once more into the full, happy life of
the house.  She was thankful to do it, thankful to welcome dawnings of
the old zest, to feel her feet involuntarily quicken to a dance, to
discover herself singing as she moved to and fro.  The winter had
passed; spring was in the air.  It seemed right that it should be in her
heart also.

As usual in the Lent term, hockey was the one absorbing subject outside
"shop," and Hannah Vernon, now advanced to the lofty position of
captain, had special reasons for welcoming her friend's reviving
spirits.

One chilly day in February she entered Darsie's study with a somewhat
unusual request.

"The girls are getting restive, and think that it's quite time we had
another fancy match.  They want me to arrange one on the spot.  It's so
blighting to be told that one is so clever, and looked to for
inspiration.  Every idea forsakes one on the instant.  You've been
hibernating for an age, you ought to have lots stored up!"

"I haven't--I've grown hideously dull.  What did we have last?"

"Thicks against Thins!  Never shall I forget it!  To play forward padded
with three separate cushions, and with shawls wound round your limbs, is
the sort of thing one rises to _once_ in a lifetime, but never twice.  I
made an adorable fat woman!  The Thins had no spirit left in them when
they beheld my bulk.  I vote that we don't have anything that involves
padding this time.  One never knows one's luck."

"No-o!  I think we might hit on something more subtle," Darsie
ruminated, with her eyes on the ceiling.  Her reputation of being the
Newnham belle remained unchallenged after two separate incursions of
Freshers.

As she sat before a "burry," clad in a blue, pinafore-like garment, from
which emerged white silk sleeves to match the collar and yoke, her hand
absently turning over a pile of notebooks, bound in green and blue and
rose, she made a striking contrast to Hannah Vernon in a cinnamon coat
and skirt, built for wear by a cheap tailor on the principle of "there
or thereabouts."  Even the notebooks reflected the personality of their
owners, for the one which Hannah carried was of the shiny black
persuasion which seemed to proclaim that, being made for good solid
work, it disdained the affectation of beauty.  Plain Hannah's little
eyes twinkled affectionately at her old friend.  She detached a pencil
from a chain which dangled by her side, and said tentatively--

"Subtle--yes!  Good biz!  Let's have a Subtler by all means."

"I--was thinking--we might have something touching upon future
possibilities.  I've not quite got it yet, but something about brides
and spinsters.  Future brides--budding brides--beautiful brides."

"Easy enough to have adjectives for the brides.  Where do the spinsters
come in?"

"Oh, one would have to infer--subtly, of course--that they _would_ be
spinsters!  That would be adjective enough.  Embryo spinsters--
preparatory spinsters--p-p-probable spinsters.  I have it!  I have it!
`Possible Brides against Probable Spinsters!'"

"Ha!" ejaculated Hannah, and drew her forefinger slowly down her nose.
"_Good_!  Top hole.  Amusin', but--injudicious?  Shouldn't mind one rap
myself; lead off the Probables with a cheer.  But, I fear me, there'd be
brickbats floating in the air.  How much would you take in coin of the
realm to go up to Vera Ruskin and invite her to play for the spinsters?
Personally I'd rather be excused."

"I'd volunteer as a start!  Love to do it!"

"Ye-es!  Just so.  Noble of you, no doubt; but unconvincing," returned
Hannah dryly.  "No!  It's a fine suggestion in theory, but in practice
I'm afraid it won't work.  I don't want to imperil my popularity for
good.  Think of something a trifle less searching!  Er--er--Slackers
against--against what?  Slackers against Swotters!  How would that do
for a change?"

Darsie curled her little nose.

"Dull!  No scope.  How would you dress?"

"Oh-h!  The Swotters might have bandages round their heads, and study
notebooks between play.  The Slackers would just--could just--"

"Just so!  `Could just'!  Too feeble, my dear!  It won't do.  What about
worth and charm?  Might make up something out of that.  Worth, solid
worth, genuine worth--"

"Moral worth!"

"That's it!  Moral Worth against Charm, personal charm!  That'll do it.
That'll do it!  _Moral Worth against Personal Charm_.  Nobody can be
offended at being asked to represent Moral Worth."

"They will, though!  The female heart is desperately wicked," returned
Hannah shrewdly.  "But if they do it's their own look-out.  We'll
preserve a high and lofty tone, and be _surprised_!  Thanks awfully, old
girl.  It's an adorable idea.  What price the Moral Worth costume--eh,
what?"

The Hockey captain went off chuckling, and excitement ran high in the
hockey world when the thrilling announcement was posted that afternoon.
"For which side shall I be asked to play?"  Forwards, Backs, and Goals
alike agitated themselves over these questions, and, sad to relate,
Hannah proved a true prophet, for while an invitation from the `Personal
Charm' captain aroused smiles of delight, the implication of `Moral
Worth' was but coldly received.

Darsie Garnett herself was conscious of an electric shock of the most
unpleasant nature when, but half an hour after the posting of the
notice, the "Moral Worths" invited her to join their ranks!  With all
the determination in the world, she found it impossible to repress a
start of surprise, and was acutely conscious of smothered giggles of
amusement from those around.  She accepted, of course, with
protestations of delight, and ten minutes later found balm in the shape
of an invitation from the rival team.  The "Personal Charms" deplored
Darsie's loss, but considered it a masterpiece of diplomacy on the part
of the "Moral Worth" captain to have headed her team with the name of
the Newnham Belle.  "No one could be snarkey after that!"

The two teams held committee meetings on the subject of costumes, which
were kept a dead secret until the hour for the match had arrived, when a
large body of spectators awaited their arrival on the ground, with
expectations pleasantly excited.  The "Personal Charms" appeared first,
marching in pairs with heads erect, and stamped on each face that
brilliant, unalterable, toothy smile affected by actresses of inferior
rank.  Each head was frizzed and tousled to about twice its natural
size, and crowned by an enormous topknot of blue ribbon.  White blouses
and skirts, blue belts, ties, and hose completed an attractive costume,
and as a finishing touch, the handle of the hockey-stick was embellished
with a second huge blue bow.

From a spectacular point of view the "Personal Charms" were certainly an
unusually attractive spectacle, but as regards popularity with the
"field," they fell far behind the rival team.  The "Moral Worths"
allowed a judicious time to elapse after the appearance of the "Personal
Charms," and then, just as the spectators were beginning to wax
impatient, excitement was aroused by the appearance of a white banner,
borne proudly aloft in the arms of two brawny Forwards.  Printed on the
banner were two lines of poetry, which at nearer view proved to be a
highly appropriate adaptation--

  "Be good, sweet maid,
  And let who will be charming!"

Certainly the "Moral Worths" had been at pains to disguise any charm
they possessed!  Even Darsie herself looked plain with her hair dragged
back into a tight little knot, her grey flannel shirt padded into the
similitude of stooping shoulders, her skirt turned carefully back to
front.  With lumping gait and heavy footsteps the team marched round the
field, and drew up beside the beaming "Personal Charms," who despite the
blasts of easterly wind through summer muslin blouses, continued to
smile, and smile, and smile.

Throughout the heated game which followed the "Moral Worths" were
distinctly the favourite team; nevertheless, it is the deplorable truth
that the "Personal Charms" won at a canter, despite the handicap of
their beribboned sticks.

When, tired and muddy, Darsie reached her study again, it was to find a
postcard from Lavender which a kindly Fresher had laid upon her "burry."
It bore but a few words written in large characters, and plentifully
underlined--

"_Which team were you asked to play for_?"

What a glow of satisfaction it gave one to be able to reply, truthfully
and accurately, with one short, illuminating--"_Both_!"

Among the other joys of the last terms, one shone out pre-eminent in
Darsie Garnett's estimation.  She was Prime Minister!  It seemed almost
too splendid to be true!  She, who three years before had made her first
appearance at Political as the bashful representative of Bootle-cum-
Linacre, to have advanced to this dizzy height of power!  To be captain
of the Hockey Club paled into insignificance before this crowning
honour, but as Hannah was "Speaker," Darsie was unable to crow as loudly
as she would have done if her friend's place had been below the gangway.

Political was held in College Hall on Monday evenings at eight o'clock,
and in old-fashioned style the members were divided into three parties,
Conservatives, Liberals, and Unionists, whose seats were so arranged as
to form three sides of a square.

Viewed from afar there was a strong element of humour about this mock
Parliament.  Prophetic it might be, but it was distinctly droll to hear
Honourable Members addressed as "Madam," while some of the statutes
embodied in the Constitution-book were quite deliciously unexpected, the
special one, which ran, "_Members occupying the front benches are
requested not to darn stockings during Political_" being a constant
source of delight to parents and friends.

Darsie was a Liberal.  Members of the Opposition accused her openly of
Socialism.  _What! shall we sacrifice our brother man for the sake of
the demon gold_? she would declaim with waving hands and cheeks aflame,
whereat the Liberals would cheer as one girl, and even the Conservatives
themselves be moved to admiration.

Debates relating to Education, Suffrage, and the House of Lords were
held during the winter months, but the crowning excitement followed a
daring Bill introduced by the Liberal party for the abolishment of the
Unionists _in toto_, on the ground that, being neither fish, flesh, nor
good red herring, they acted but as a drag on the wheels of progress.
The benches were crowded to their fullest capacity on the occasion of
this historic debate; even the Dons themselves came in to listen, and
the whips flew round the corridors, giving no quarter to the few
skulkers discovered at work in their studies, until they also were
forced into the breach.  As a result, the Unionist party, supported by
Moderates on both sides, achieved a brilliant and decisive victory.

So much for Political, but the Prime Minister occupied another proud
position, for Margaret France's prophecy had been fulfilled, and Darsie
was now captain of the Clough Fire Brigade.  Beneath her were two
lieutenants, and two companies, each seven girls strong, and the duty of
choosing times of the utmost inconvenience and unpreparedness for drill
alarms rested entirely at her discretion.  When the fire-bell rang,
every member of the brigade must leave whatever she happened to be
about, and dash pell-mell to the assembling-ground on an upper story.
There the force ranked up in order, the captain explained the locality
and nature of the supposed conflagration, and each "man" received "his"
own instruction--one to shut windows and ventilators, and so diminish
draughts, another to uncoil the hose, a third to affix the nozzle, and
so on.  The work was accomplished, examined by the authorities, and the
"men" were back on the top landing, ranked up in their original order,
in an incredibly short space of time, when the captain gave a sharp
criticism of the performance, followed by a few questions to test the
general knowledge of the staff: Where was Mary Murray's study?  What was
its aspect?  What was the nearest water supply?  Etcetera.

One excuse for non-attendance, and one only, was allowed to pass
muster--a member who chanced to be in a hot bath what time the bell rang
forth the alarm might lie at ease and smile at the scurry without,
health and the risk of chill being considered before imaginary dangers.
If, however, the bath were _cold_, out she must get, dash into the coat
and skirt which, for members of the fire brigade, supplanted the
ordinary dressing-gown, and take her place with the rest.

Nor--with Darsie Garnett as captain--was it any use to attempt
deception, as a tired little Fresher discovered to her cost, when she
naughtily turned a warm stream into her cold bath and refused to budge.
No sooner were lightning-like instructions rapped out upstairs than down
flew the irate captain, rapped at the door, demanded admission, and--in
the absence of steam upon the wall--sentenced the cringing truant to a
month's suspension of privileges.

Nor was Darsie's own position free from anxiety, for once in a term it
was the prerogative of the brigade to surprise the captain, and woe
befall her prestige if, on that occasion, she were found wanting!  Coat,
skirt, and slippers lay nightly on a chair by her bedside, together with
the inevitable pile of notebooks, and she felt a burden off her mind
when the alarm had come and gone.

Deep, deep down in the recesses of Darsie's mind there slumbered a fell
ambition.  If there could be a _real_ fire before her term of office
expired!  Not a serious one, of course--nothing to imperil the safety of
the dear old house, but just sufficient to cause a _real_ alarm, and
give the brigade an opportunity of demonstrating its powers!  It was
almost too aggravating to be borne, to hear one morning that a second-
year girl had indulged in a study fire, and had extinguished it of her
own accord.  Extinguished by private effort, when a captain, two
lieutenants, and fourteen "men" were languishing for an opportunity to
exhibit their powers!  The captain spoke sternly to the second-year
girl, and rebuked her.

"How," she demanded, "can you _expect_ a reliable force, if precious
opportunities are to be wasted like this?  Curtains ablaze, and the
bedclothes singeing.  We may wait for _years_ for another such
opportunity!"

"But where do _I_ come in?" cried the second-year girl.  "I gave ten and
sixpence for that quilt.  And a jug of water standing close at hand!  It
was only human nature--"

"I hope," returned the captain of the Fire Brigade icily--"I _hope_ that
is not the spirit in which you propose to go through life.  It's a poor
thing if you cannot sacrifice a ten-and-sixpenny quilt in the interest
of the public good."  And she stalked majestically from the room.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

TRIPOS WEEK.

The Tripos week!  Every third-year girl felt as if life and death
trembled in the balance during those eventful days.  They woke on the
Monday morning with much the same feeling as that of a patient who
expects to have an arm amputated at eleven, and is morally convinced
that she will sink beneath the strain, and when at seven o'clock a
second-year friend crept into the study, tray in hand, and administered
sympathising cups of tea, the final touch was given to the illusion.

Darsie quailed before the prospect of those three-hour papers.
Experience had proved that she was not at her best in examinations;
imaginative people rarely are, since at the critical moment the brain is
apt to wander off on dire excursions into the future, envisaging the
horrors of failing, instead of buckling to work in order to ensure
success.  Historical French Grammar in especial loomed like a pall, and
she entered the Mission Room at Saint Columba's with the operation-like
feeling developed to its acutest point.

For several minutes after taking the first paper in her hand Darsie
found it impossible to decipher the words.  The type danced mistily
before her eyes; and when at last letters shaped themselves out of the
confusion, the last state was worse than the first, for she was
convinced--drearily, hopelessly convinced--that she could not answer a
single question out of the number.

She laid down the paper, and steadied herself resolutely.  All over the
room other girls were sitting on hard, uncomfortable chairs before
tables like her own, some motionless and stunned-looking like herself,
some already setting briskly to work.  On the walls, among a number of
quotations, "_Help one another_!" stared her in the face with tragic
significance, and again: "How far high failure overleaps the bounds of
low successes."  _Failure_!  She lifted the paper again, and decided
with a glimmer of hope that she could answer at least _one_ question,
set to work, and scribbled for life until the last moment of the
prescribed three hours!  What exhaustion!  What collapse!  Positively
one's legs wobbled beneath one as one trailed wearily Newnhamwards.
What a comfort to be fussed over and petted, treated as distinguished
invalids whom the College was privileged to tend!

The Tripos girls "sat at High" at the head of the room, surrounded by
attentive Dons, with the V.C. herself smiling encouragement, and urging
them to second helpings of chicken (chicken!!).  By the time that it was
necessary to start forth for the afternoon's ordeal they felt mentally
and physically braced, and the operation feeling lessened sensibly.

At the afternoon's ordeal, however, the weariness and depression grew
more acute than ever, and on the walk home the comparing of answers had
anything but a cheering effect.  No girl was satisfied; each was morally
convinced that her companions had done better than herself.  Where she
had failed to answer a question, a reminder of the solution filled her
with despair.  Of course!  It was as simple as ABC.  She had known it
off by heart.  Nothing short of softening of the brain could explain
such idiotic forgetfulness.

It was a kindly custom which separated the sufferers on their return to
College, each one being carried off by her special second-year adorer to
a cheery little tea-party, for which the most congenial spirits and the
most delectable fare were provided.  Here the tired senior was soothed
and fed, and her self-esteem revived by an attitude of reverence on the
part of the audience.  The second-year girls shuddered over the papers;
were convinced that never, no never, could they face the like, and
suggested that it would be a saving of time to go down at once.

Later on that first evening, when Marian White appeared to put her
invalid to bed, she bore in her hand a letter from Margaret France,
which Darsie hailed with a cry of joy.

"Ah!  I _thought_ she would write to me.  I wondered that I didn't have
a letter this morning, but she was right as usual.  She knew I should
need it more to-night!"

Margaret's letter was short and to the point--

"Dearest Darsie,--A year ago you were cheering me!  How I wish I could
do the same for you in your need, but as I can't be present in the
flesh, here comes a little line to greet you, old dear, and to tell you
to be of good cheer.  You are very tired, and very discouraged, and very
blue.  I _know_!  Every one is.  It's part of the game.  Do you remember
what a stern mentor I had, and how she bullied me, and packed me to bed,
and took away my books?  Oh, the good old times!  The good old times,
how happy we were--how I think of them now, and long to be back!  But
the best part remains, for I have still my friend, and you and I,
Darsie, `belong' for our lives.

"Cheer up, old dear!  _You've done a lot better than you think_!

"Margaret."

"What's the matter now?" asked the second-year girl sharply, spying two
big tears course slowly down her patient's cheeks, and Darsie returned a
stammering reply--

"I've had such a ch-ch-cheering letter!"

"Have you indeed!  The less of _that_ sort of cheering you get this
week, the better for you!" snapped Marian once more.  She was jealous of
Margaret France, as she was jealous of every girl in the College for
whom Darsie Garnett showed a preference, and she strongly resented any
interference with her own prerogative.  "Hurry into your dressing-gown,
please, and I'll brush your hair," she said now in her most dictatorial
tones.  "I'm a pro. at brushing hair--a hair-dresser taught me how to do
it.  You hold the brush at the side to begin with, and work gradually
round to the flat.  I let a Fresher brush mine one right when I'd a
headache, and she began in the middle of my cheek.  There's been a
coldness between us ever since.  There! isn't that good?  Gets right
into the roots, doesn't it, and tingles them up!  Nothing so soothing as
a smooth, hard brush."

Darsie shut her eyes and purred like a sleek, lazy little cat.

"De-lic-ious!  Lovely!  You _do_ brush well!  I could sit here for
hours."

"You won't get a chance.  Ten minutes at most, and then off you go, and
not a peep at another book till to-morrow morning."

"Marian--_really_--I _must_!  Just for ten minutes, to revive my
memory."

"I'll tell you a story!" said Marian quietly--"a _true_ story from my
own experience.  It was when I was at school and going in for the
Cambridge Senior, the last week, when we were having the exams.  We had
_slaved_ all the term, and were at the last gasp.  The head girl was one
Annie Macdiarmid, a marvel of a creature, the most all-round scholar
I've ever met.  She was invariably first in everything, and I usually
came in a bad third.  Well, we'd had an arithmetic exam, one day, pretty
stiff, but not more so than usual, and on this particular morning at
eleven o'clock we were waiting to hear the result.  The Mathematic
Master was a lamb--so keen, and humorous, and just--a _rageur_ at times,
but that was only to be expected.  He came into the room, papers in
hand, his mouth screwed up, and his eyebrows nearly hidden under his
hair.  We knew at a glance that something awful had happened.  He
cleared his throat several times, and began to read aloud the arithmetic
results.  `Total, a hundred.  Bessie Smith, eighty-seven.'  There was a
rustle of surprise.  Not Annie Macdiarmid?  Just Bessie--an ordinary
sort of creature, who wasn't going in for the Local at all.  `Mary Ross,
eighty-two.  Stella Bruce, seventy-four.'  Where did _I_ come in?  I'd
never been lower than that.  `Kate Stevenson, sixty-four.'  Some one
else fifty, some one else forty, _and_ thirty _and_ twenty, and still
not a mention of Annie Macdiarmid or of me.  You should have _seen_ her
face!  I shall never forget it.  _Green_! and she laced her fingers in
and out, and chewed, and chewed.  I was too stunned to feel.  The world
seemed to have come to an end.  Down it came--sixteen, fourteen, ten--
and then at last--at bitter, long last--`Miss Marian White, _six_!  Miss
Macdiar-mid, Two!'"

Darsie stared beneath the brush, drawing a long breath of dismay.

"What _did_ you do?"

"Nothing!  That was where he showed himself so wise.  An ordinary master
would have raged and stormed, insisted upon our working for extra hours,
going over and over the old ground, but he knew better.  He just banged
all the books together, tucked them under his arm, and called out: `No
more work!  Put on your hats and run off home as fast as you can go, and
tell your mothers from me to take you to the Waxworks, or a Wild Beast
show.  Don't dare to show yourselves in school again until Monday
morning.  Read as many stories as you please, but open a school book at
your peril!'"

Marian paused dramatically, Darsie peered at her through a mist of hair,
and queried weakly, "Well?"

"Well--so we didn't!  We just slacked and lazed, and amused ourselves
till the Monday morning, and then, like giants refreshed, we went down
to the fray and--"

"And what?"

"I've told you before!  I got second-class honours, and the Macdiarmid
came out first in all England, distinction in a dozen subjects--
arithmetic among them.  So now, Miss Garnett, kindly take the moral to
heart, and let me hear no more nonsense about `reviving memories.'
_Your_ memory needs putting to sleep, so that it may wake up refreshed
and active after a good night's rest."

And Darsie weakly, reluctantly obeyed.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

FAREWELL TO NEWNHAM.

May week followed hard on the Tripos that year, but Darsie took no part
in the festivities.  The remembrance of the tragic event of last summer
made her shrink from witnessing the same scenes, and in her physically
exhausted condition she was thankful to stay quietly in college.
Moreover, a sad task lay before her in the packing up her belongings,
preparatory to bidding adieu to the beloved little room which had been
the scene of so many joys and sorrows during the last three years.

Vie Vernon, as a publicly engaged young lady, was paying a round of
visits to her _fiance's_ relations, but Mr and Mrs Vernon had come up
as usual, arranging to keep on their rooms, so that they might have the
satisfaction of being in Cambridge when the Tripos List came out.  With
a son like Dan and a daughter like Hannah, satisfaction was a foregone
conclusion; calm, level-headed creatures both of them, who were not to
be flurried or excited by the knowledge of a critical moment, but most
sanely and sensibly collected their full panoply of wits to turn them to
good account.

Hannah considered it in the last degree futile to dread an exam.  "What
else," she would demand in forceful manner--"what else are you working
for?  For what other reason are you here?"  But her arguments, though
unanswerable, continued to be entirely unconvincing to Darsie and other
nervously constituted students.

The same difference of temperament showed itself in the manner of
waiting for results.  Dan and Hannah, so to speak, wiped their pens
after the writing of the last word of the last paper, and there and then
resigned themselves to their fate.  They had done their best; nothing
more was possible in the way of addition or alteration--for good or ill
the die was cast.  Then why worry?  Wait quietly, and take what came
along!

Blessed faculty of common sense!  A man who is born with such a
temperament escapes half the strain of life, though it is to be doubted
whether he can rise to the same height of joy as his more imaginative
neighbour, who lies awake shivering at the thought of possible ills, and
can no more "wait quietly" for a momentous decision than he could
breathe with comfort in a burning house.

When the morning arrived on which the results of the Tripos were to be
posted on the door of the Senate House, Darsie and Hannah had taken a
last sad farewell of their beloved Newnham, and were ensconced with Mr
and Mrs Vernon in their comfortable rooms.  The lists were expected to
appear early in the morning, and the confident parents had arranged a
picnic "celebration" party for the afternoon.

Darsie never forgot that morning--the walk to the Senate House with Dan
and Hannah on either side, the sight of the waiting crowd, the strained
efforts at conversation, the dragging hours.

At long last a list appeared--the men's list only: for the women's a
further wait would be necessary.  But one glance at the paper showed
Dan's name proudly ensconced where every one had expected it would be,
and in a minute he was surrounded by an eager throng--congratulating,
cheering, shaking him by the hand.  He looked quiet as ever, but his
eyes shone, and when Darsie held out her hand he gripped it with a
violence which almost brought the tears to her eyes.

The crowd cleared away slowly, the women students retiring to refresh
themselves with luncheon before beginning a second wait.  The Vernons
repaired to their rooms and feasted on the contents of the hamper
prepared for the picnic, the father and mother abeam with pride and
satisfaction, Dan obviously filled with content, and dear old Hannah
full of quips.  Darsie felt ashamed of herself because she alone failed
to throw off anxiety; but her knees _would_ tremble, her throat _would_
parch, and her eyes _would_ turn back restlessly to study the clock.

  "Better to die by sudden shock,
  Than perish piecemeal on the rock!"

The old couplet which as a child she had been used to quote darted back
into her mind with a torturing pang.  How much longer of this agony
could she stand?  Anything, anything would be better than this dragging
on in suspense, hour after hour.  But when once again the little party
approached the Senate House, she experienced a swift change of front.
No, no, this was not suspense; it was hope!  Hope was blessed and
kindly.  Only certainty was to be dreaded, the grim, unalterable fact.

The little crowd of girls pressed forward to read the lists.  Darsie
peered with the rest, but saw nothing but a mist and blur.  Then a voice
spoke loudly by her side; Hannah's voice:

"First Class!  _Hurrah_!"

Whom did she mean?  Darsie's heart soared upward with a dizzy hope, her
eyes cleared and flashed over the list of names.  Hannah Vernon--Mary
Bates--Eva Murray--many names, but not her own.

The mist and the blur hid the list once more, she felt an arm grip her
elbow, and Dan's voice cried cheerily--

"A Second Class!  Good for you, Darsie!  I thought you were going to
fail."

It was a relief.  Not a triumph; not the proud, glad moment of which she
had dreamed, but a relief from a great dread.  The girls congratulated
her, wrung her hand, cried, "Well done!" and wished her luck; third-
class girls looked envious and subdued; first-class girls in other
"shops" whispered in her ear that it was an acknowledged fact that
Modern Languages had had an uncommonly stiff time this year.  Modern
Languages who had themselves gained a first class, kept discreetly out
of the way.  Hannah said, "See, I was right!  Are you satisfied now?"
No one showed any sign of disappointment.  Perhaps no one but herself
had believed in the possibility of a first class.

The last band of students turned away from the gates with a strange
reluctance.  It was the last, the very last incident of the dear old
life--the happiest years of life which they had ever known, the years
which from this moment would exist but as a memory.  Even the most
successful felt a pang mingling with their joy, as they turned their
backs on the gates and walked quietly away.

Later that afternoon Dan and Darsie found themselves strolling across
the meadows towards Grantchester.  They were alone, for, the picnic
having fallen through, Mr and Mrs Vernon had elected to rest after the
day's excitement, and Hannah had settled herself down to the writing of
endless letters to relations and friends, bearing the good news of the
double honours.

Darsie's few notes had been quickly accomplished, and had been more
apologetic than jubilant in tone, but she honestly tried to put her own
feelings in the background, and enter into Dan's happiness as he
confided to her his plans for the future.

"I'm thankful I've come through all right--it means so much.  I'm a
lucky fellow, Darsie.  I've got a rattling opening, at the finest of the
public schools, the school I'd have chosen above all others.  Jenson got
a mastership there two years ago--my old coach, you remember!  He was
always good to me, thought more of me than I deserved, and he spoke of
me to the Head.  There's a vacancy for a junior master next term.  They
wrote to me about it.  It was left open till the lists came out, but now!
now it will go through.  I'm safe for it now."

"Oh, Dan, I'm so glad; I'm so glad for you!  You've worked so hard that
you deserve your reward.  A mastership, and time to write--that's your
ambition still?  You are still thinking of your book?"

"Ah, my book!"  Dan's dark eyes lightened, his rugged face shone.  It
was easy to see how deeply that book of the future had entered into his
life's plans.  He discussed it eagerly as they strolled across the
fields, pointing out the respects in which it differed from other
treatises of the kind; and Darsie listened, and sympathised, appreciated
to the extent of her abilities, and hated herself because, the more
absorbed and eager Dan grew, the more lonely and dejected became her own
mood.  Then they talked of Hannah and her future.  With so good a record
she would have little difficulty in obtaining her ambition in a post as
mathematical mistress at a girls' school.  It would be hard on Mrs
Vernon to lose the society of both her daughters, but she was wise
enough to realise that Hannah's _metier_ was not for a domestic life,
and unselfish enough to wish her girls to choose the most congenial
_roles_.

"And my mother will still have three at home, three big, incompetent
girls!" sighed Darsie in reply, and her heart swelled with a sudden
spasm of rebellion.  "Oh, Dan, after all my dreams!  I'm so bitterly
disappointed.  Poor little second-class me!"

"_Don't_, Darsie!" cried Dan sharply.  He stood still, facing her in the
narrow path, but now the glow had gone from his face; it was twisted
with lines of pain and anxiety.  "Darsie! it's the day of my life, but
it's all going to fall to pieces if you are sad!  You've done your best,
and you've done well, and if you are a bit disappointed that you've
failed for a first yourself, can't you--can't you take any comfort out
of _mine_?  It's more than half your own.  I'd never have got there by
myself!"

"Dan, dear, you're talking nonsense!  What nonsense you talk!  What have
_I_ done?  What _could_ I do for a giant like you?"

Dan brushed aside the word with a wave of the hand.

"Do you remember when we were talking last year, beside the fire, in the
old study one afternoon, when all the others were out, talking about
poor Percival, and your answer to a question I asked?  `_He needs me,
Dan_!' you said.  I argued very loftily about the necessity of a man
standing alone and facing his difficulties by himself, and you said that
was true, but only a part of the truth.  I've found that out for myself
since then.  If that was true of Percival, it is fifty times truer of
me!  _I_ need you, Darsie!  I shall always need you.  I've not a penny-
piece in the world, except what my father allows me.  I shall probably
always be poor.  For years to come I shall be grinding away as a junior
master.  Even when the book is written it can never bring much return in
a monetary sense, but success will come in the end, I'll _make_ it come!
And when it does, it will belong to you as much as to me.  You'll
remember that?"

"Yes...  Thank you, Dan!"  The answer came in a breathless gasp.
Darsie's big eyes were fixed upon Dan's face in rapt, incredulous gaze.
The cramp of loneliness had loosened from her heart; the depression had
vanished; a marvellous new interest had entered into her life; she was
filled with a beatific content.

"I'll remember!  I'll be proud to remember.  But--I don't understand!"

"I don't understand myself," said Dan simply.  "I only know it is true.
So don't get low, Darsie, and don't be discouraged.  You're in a class
by yourself, and all the honours in the world couldn't improve you.  And
now that's over, and we start afresh!"

It was like Dan to hurry back with all speed to more practical talk.
Darsie understood, and was satisfied.  They stood together for another
moment looking back on the massed towers and spires of Cambridge, then
slowly, reluctantly, turned away.

A new life lay ahead, its outline vague and undefined like that of the
landscape around, but the sun was shining.  It shone full on their young
faces, as they went forward, hand in hand.

THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's A College Girl, by Mrs. George de Horne Vaizey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COLLEGE GIRL ***

***** This file should be named 21110.txt or 21110.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/1/1/21110/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
