The Project Gutenberg EBook of Minute Mysteries, by Harold Austin Ripley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Minute Mysteries
       [Detectograms]

Author: Harold Austin Ripley

Release Date: December 4, 2015 [EBook #50603]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINUTE MYSTERIES ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            MINUTE MYSTERIES
                            [_Detectograms_]


                                   BY
                              H. A. RIPLEY

                           WITH A FOREWORD BY
                             LEWIS E. LAWES
                      _Warden of Sing Sing Prison_

                          BOSTON AND NEW YORK
                        HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                    _The Riverside Press Cambridge_
                                  1932

              COPYRIGHT, 1932, BY HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REPRODUCE THIS BOOK OR PARTS
                          THEREOF IN ANY FORM


                          The Riverside Press
                       CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS
                         PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.


                                   TO
                               MY MOTHER




                                FOREWORD


The solution of criminal mysteries constitutes one of the most
absorbing, possibly the most intriguing forms of mental activity
existent. It calls for something more than mere cold intelligence and
reasoning ability, requiring in addition native perception, intuition,
and a natural understanding of human behavior under stress of emotion
and passion. Furthermore, some knowledge of pathological or abnormal
behaviorism is a requisite.

Mr. Ripley’s excellently thought-out series of mysteries might be said
to represent a very adequate cross-section of the problems perennially
confronting the law-enforcers and official crime-solvers of the nation.
The points of evidence are cleverly assembled and the _nuances_ of
incrimination are very subtly shaded.

It would be well for the reader interested in successfully solving these
problems to endeavor to think, not as a detective, but as the criminal
in the case would think, in order to arrive at a correct solution. I
have found that to deal adequately with the criminal after conviction,
and while in confinement, it is necessary to understand his personal
problems. To accomplish this, one must first think as does the criminal,
discover the sequent conclusions upon which he based his anti-social
activities, and thereupon make use of these findings to assist him
toward rehabilitation.

In this novel challenge to amateur criminologists, who suffer from a
dearth of laboratory specimens upon which to experiment, Mr. Ripley
offers an excellent opportunity—that of examining and forming
conclusions upon the more elemental, vital, and dramatic aspects of
various typical criminal situations, without the drawback of fantasy and
concocted sordidness, which, for the practical criminologist, takes the
glamour and color out of this thing called—Crime.

                                                          Lewis E. Lawes




                            AUTHOR’S PREFACE


Chief Inspector Kelley, that grizzled veteran of the Detective Bureau,
was talking to his nephew, Jim Barry, who had indicated a desire to
enter the uncrowded field of criminology.

‘The average policeman,’ he said, ‘looks upon the lay criminologist in
much the same manner as the professional in any field regards the
amateur. Generally speaking, that attitude is justified.

‘In thirty years of police work, however, I have met no one in detective
circles, in or out of the force, who so effectively combines theoretical
knowledge with practical application as Professor Fordney.

‘A man of definite scientific attainments and recognition, he yet
appreciates that the simple fundamentals of crime detection are
effective in ninety per cent of all criminal cases. While he has
unraveled by scientific means some amazing and extremely baffling crimes
that otherwise would have gone unsolved, he puts his greatest reliance
on those basic principles upon which rests the whole structure of crime
detection.

‘His major theory is that most crimes are simple; that their solution
calls only for the exercise of ordinary talents developed to an
extraordinary degree; that the stupidity of the average criminal
himself, and not the brilliance of the detective, is responsible for his
detection.

‘In that, I might tell you, he finds complete corroboration in the
experience of such an outstanding detective of world-wide reputation as
Sir Melville L. Macnaghten, C.B., late Chief of the Criminal
Investigation Department of Scotland Yard. Commenting on the capture of
a particularly vicious murderer, he remarked, “But for the fact that the
student of criminal history is constantly faced with the stupidity of
the criminal, there would be nothing more remarkable in this case than
the fatuity of the man who, having murdered solely for personal
gratifications, and taken every precaution, as he thought, to avoid
discovery, immediately wrote blackmailing letters in which he showed
guilty knowledge of a secret murder.”

‘Fordney could undoubtedly explain such an inconsistency as this by his
uncanny knowledge of criminal psychology,’ continued Kelley. ‘Among
psychologists his insight into the criminal mind and its reactions is
appreciated as being authoritative.

‘His greatest interest is his class in criminology at the University. He
still finds time, however, to assist actively the police of many cities
who frequently consult him on cases they find unusually puzzling.

‘There are instances also in which his part has been that of a
bystander, where a word of suggestion, modestly given, has frequently
disposed of cases before they were brought to the attention of the
police.

‘If the Professor is convinced you have the natural qualifications, Jim,
and a real inclination for work, I can get you into his class. He will
take not only a personal, but a fatherly, interest in you, as in the
rest of his students. You will receive the finest possible training
given by a man of broad understanding and great human sympathies. Out of
his vast experience and knowledge, gained in studying crime in all parts
of the world, he will develop in you those qualities essential to
success in this field.

‘You will find him a genial, ruddy, kindly man of fifty, with a
waistline of forty. There is nothing subtle in his face or manner. A
characterful nose rises above a strong and determined mouth, adorned by
a blond mustache. A pair of keen but smiling blue eyes completes a
commonplace face. Although he refuses to admit it, his rapidly thinning
hair causes him great concern. A bit vain, the old codger, but don’t
tell him I told you so,’ laughed the Inspector.

‘Scrupulously dressed, he looks like an amiable and highly successful
business executive. He’s a mixer and thoroughly enjoys the good things
of life. He views the passing parade with a keen sense of humor, few
illusions, and a genuine interest in his fellow man. Detests hypocrisy;
would rather see ten guilty men acquitted than one innocent man
condemned. Recognizes his own fallibility, but knows his own worth and
does not suffer from that abominable social vice, false modesty.

‘You might be interested in knowing his only hobby is that of designing,
making, and repairing toys for children. He’s known to hundreds of them
as the Toy Man.

‘Though a bachelor, he looks with favor on the ladies, enjoys their
company and is thoroughly sociable.

‘It’s a pleasure and an education to know him. More than once he’s
helped your old uncle and absolutely refused the credit that was his,’
concluded Inspector Kelley.


In the following pages you will find some interesting experiences taken
from the Professor’s case book. They illustrate forcibly his contention
that crime is simple and that most criminals are caught, not by any
superhuman qualities of the detective, but by their own ignorance,
stupidity, or carelessness.

In these accounts every fact, every clue necessary to the solution is
given. The answer is in the story itself. You need look nowhere else but
there. Each problem has only one possible solution.

Written in less than two hundred and sixty words, these little stories
can be read in a minute.

Here is your chance to work on an absolute equality with the Professor;
to match your wits with his and the criminal’s. You know as much as the
Professor does. Now you have an opportunity of proving just how good a
detective you are and what poor detectives your friends are.

The author hopes you will find them as fascinating reading as they were
in the telling by the Professor.

                                                            H. A. Ripley




                                CONTENTS


  Foreword by Lewis E. Lawes                                         vii
  Author’s Preface                                                    ix
  It Stands to Reason! _A New National Game_                         xix
  1. A Crack Shot                                                      1
  2. On the Scent                                                      3
  3. Fatal Error                                                       5
  4. The Poison Murder Case                                            7
  5. A Strange ‘Kidnaping’                                             9
  6. A Valuable Formula                                               11
  7. Strangled                                                        13
  8. Death in the Office                                              15
  9. They Usually Forget Something                                    17
  10. The Professor Gives a Lesson                                    19
  11. Upstairs and Down                                               21
  12. Class Day                                                       23
  13. A Hot Pursuit                                                   25
  14. A Question of Identity                                          27
  15. A Yachtsman’s Alibi                                             29
  16. Murder at Coney Island                                          31
  17. Too Clever                                                      33
  18. Bloody Murder                                                   35
  19. Death Back-Stage                                                37
  20. An Easy Combination                                             39
  21. A Modern Knight                                                 41
  22. The Jewel Robbery                                               43
  23. Before the Coroner’s Inquest                                    45
  24. The Fifth Avenue Hold-Up                                        47
  25. Behind Locked Doors                                             49
  26. Lost at Sea                                                     51
  27. A Suave Gunman                                                  53
  28. Accidental Death                                                55
  29. Easy Money                                                      57
  30. Robbery at High Noon                                            59
  31. The Wrong Foot Forward                                          61
  32. Death Attends the Party                                         63
  33. No Way Out                                                      65
  34. Midnight Murder                                                 67
  35. Speakeasy Stick-Up                                              69
  36. Behind Time                                                     71
  37. A Broken Engagement                                             73
  38. The Holden Road Murder                                          75
  39. Fisherman’s Luck                                                77
  40. The Unlucky Elephant                                            79
  41. The Professor Listens                                           81
  42. Ten-Fifteen                                                     83
  43. Rapid Transit                                                   85
  44. The Professor is Disappointed                                   87
  45. A Dramatic Triumph                                              89
  46. Murder at the Lake                                              91
  47. The Professor Studies a Coat                                    93
  48. Too Late                                                        95
  49. Sergeant Reynolds’s Theory                                      97
  50. Daylight Robbery                                                99
  51. A Simple Solution                                              101
  52. Who?                                                           103
  53. Murder in the Swamp                                            105
  54. Death by Drowning                                              107
  55. Tragedy at the Convention                                      109
  56. A Murderer’s Mistake                                           111
  57. Babe Comes Through                                             113
  58. A Soldier of Fortune                                           115
  59. Number Twenty-Six                                              117
  60. The Pullman Car Murder                                         121
  61. Forgery                                                        123
  62. The Christmas Eve Tragedy                                      125
  63. A Knight of the Bath                                           127
  64. Murder in the First Degree                                     129
  65. A Rendezvous with Death                                        131
  66. A Rum Regatta                                                  133
  67. Who is the Heir?                                               135
  68. The Professor Stops a Blunder                                  137
  69. The Perfect Crime                                              139
  70. The Professor Sees Through It                                  141
  71. The Kidnapers’ Cleverness                                      143
  Solutions                                                          145




                          IT STANDS TO REASON!
                          A NEW NATIONAL GAME


Here is a fascinating game of wits for a party of any size. It can be
played in either of two ways.

1. Select one or more stories from the _Minute Mysteries_ that
particularly appeal to you. Make as many copies of each as there are
guests at the party. Then pass the copies around and allow three
minutes, say, for your guests to study them. At the end of this time
each must hand you a written solution, giving the line of reasoning
which was used. You compare these with the solutions at the back of the
book; the one who is most often correct is the winner.

2. Instead of making copies of each story, you may read it aloud, slowly
and carefully. If any of the listeners so desire, it may be read a
second time. But after this no questions may be asked.

After the period agreed upon has elapsed, each guest writes out his
solution as in (1), and hands it to you for comparison with the book.


Method number 1 puts the emphasis on one’s powers of reasoning and
analysis; method number 2 adds to these a premium on an accurate memory.




                            MINUTE MYSTERIES


                                   1
                             _A Crack Shot_

Professor Fordney was hunting in the Rockies when informed of a tragedy
at one of the camps. Thinking he might be of some help, he went over,
and, after introducing himself, Butler, the victim’s companion, told him
of the accident.

‘When Marshall hadn’t returned to camp at nine o’clock last night, I was
a bit worried because he didn’t know these mountains. There wasn’t a
star out and it was dark and moonless, so I decided to look around for
him. We’re five miles from anyone, you know.

‘Putting more wood on the fire, I set out. After searching for an hour,
I was coming up the slope of a ravine when I saw a pair of eyes shining
out at me in the dark.

‘Calling twice, and getting no answer, I fired, thinking it was a
mountain lion. Imagine my horror when I reached the spot, struck a
match, and saw I had nearly blown the head off Marshall. A terrible
experience!

‘I carried his body back to camp and then walked to the nearest house to
report the accident.’

‘How far from camp did you find Marshall?’ asked Fordney.

‘About a quarter of a mile.’

‘I see your right hand is bandaged. How do you manage to shoot with it?’

‘Oh, I use either hand.’

‘Mind if I look at the gun?’

‘Not at all,’ said Butler, handing it over.

‘H’m, European make, I see. Had it long?’

‘No, it’s rather new.’

‘Why did you deliberately murder Marshall?’ demanded Fordney abruptly
... ‘for that’s what you did.’


     How did the Professor know Butler had murdered his companion?


                                   2
                             _On the Scent_

‘I couldn’t wait to be announced,’ said George Collins, Florida’s
foremost prohibition agent, and a great wit, as he stepped into the
Professor’s office.

‘How long are you going to be in New York?’ asked Fordney, as the two
friends shook hands.

‘I’m due back in Miami now,’ replied Collins, ‘but I wanted to
congratulate you on your success in the Hicks murder case. I wish
interesting things like that would happen in my game. However, I did
have an amusing experience last December.

‘Sneaky Joe, a stool-pigeon, tipped me off to a huge still he said was
working about forty miles from headquarters. A narrow road through dense
woods led to the spot. Arriving there, I found an old dilapidated shanty
screened by trees. As I entered the woods, I smelled alcohol. Sneaky Joe
was right, after all, I thought, as I drove up to the shanty.

‘I got out and peered cautiously around, but the place seemed deserted.
After opening the door and entering the house, however, I knew liquor
was not being made there. I searched the woods, but found nothing. As I
was driving back along the road at a good rate, I discovered the alcohol
I smelled was coming from my own radiator! Imagine my chagrin!’

The Professor laughed heartily and said to his friend, ‘Stay over for my
birthday party tonight, the ladies would love to hear that yarn of
yours.’


      What did the Professor find preposterous in Collins’s story?


                                   3
                             _Fatal Error_

‘Crowley was an eccentric and taciturn old fellow, but I liked him,’
remarked Fordney. ‘When he was found dead last December, I took a
personal interest in the case. Harold Bronson, his last known caller,
had this to say of his visit:

‘“After leaving word at my hotel where I might be reached if wanted, I
arrived at Crowley’s suburban estate shortly after five o’clock. I found
him seated in the dusk at the end of his library table. Courteously
enough for him, he waved me into a chair at the other end and invited me
to dine with him at eight o’clock. Reaching for my cigarettes, I
remembered that Crowley did not permit smoking.

‘“His principal contributions to our discussion were his usual nods of
approval, grunts, and monosyllables. Very sparing of words, was Mr.
Crowley.

‘“About seven o’clock the telephone rang and he asked me to answer it.
It was my wife asking me to return at once to see an unexpected visitor.
Finishing the conversation, I returned to my chair and, after I
explained the call, Crowley nodded assent to my request to leave
immediately.

‘“On the way out, as the lights had not been turned on, I bumped my
head, which explains this bruise. Just as I reached the door, he called
after me—‘See you tomorrow at ten.’ He was certainly all right when I
left him shortly after seven.”

‘Although Bronson’s telephone alibi was later proved sound, he had
hardly finished his story before I was convinced he was implicated,’
concluded Fordney.


                  What directed suspicion to Bronson?


                                   4
                        _The Poison Murder Case_

‘I’m going to the theater now,’ Bob Kewley told Professor Fordney at
their club. ‘I wish you’d spend the evening with Uncle John. He’s been
worried lately.’

Upon reaching the Kewley home an hour later, Fordney found the butler in
an agitated state.

‘After ordering coffee, Mr. Kewley locked himself in his library an hour
ago, sir. When I rapped on the door just now, he didn’t answer.’

The two men forced the lock and found John Kewley on the floor, an empty
strychnine bottle at his side. The terrace door was open. After a
careful examination, Fordney returned home. A few hours later, Bob
Kewley entered his living-room.

‘Thought I’d stop in on my way home. Don’t you think Uncle John looks
worried?’

‘Your uncle, Bob, is dead. Strychnine. Your butler and I found him lying
on the floor, but were too late to save him.’

‘How horrible, Fordney! Why was the library door locked, do you
suppose?’

‘That puzzles me. Has your butler been with you long?’

‘For years,’ replied Bob, his head buried in his hands.

‘Well, you’re a wealthy man now.’

‘What of it? Uncle John meant more to me than all the money in the
world.’

‘I wish I could believe that,’ replied Fordney. ‘You’ll need a better
alibi than those,’ pointing to the ticket stubs Bob was nervously
fingering.


           How had Kewley aroused the Professor’s suspicions?


                                   5
                        _A Strange ‘Kidnaping’_

‘I haven’t the faintest idea why I was kidnaped,’ said Johnson to
Professor Fordney, an hour after he returned home. ‘I never miss Sunday
evening services, you know, so I’m afraid I haven’t much time to discuss
it now.’

‘Oh, just a brief account of your experience is all that is necessary,’
remarked the Professor.

So Johnson proceeded.

‘I was walking along Burnham Street about 2 A.M. Friday when two masked
men, with drawn guns, ordered me into a blue sedan. I was blindfolded
and gagged. After driving for about an hour, I was led into a house and
down some stairs to a small room, where they removed my blindfold and
gag. They took off my outer clothing and hung it on a chair. Then they
questioned me at length about the Shirley case and refused to believe I
knew nothing of it.

‘Exasperated, they threatened to kill me, and when I remonstrated, one
of them hit me on the head with a black-jack and I went down
unconscious.

‘The next thing I knew was when I came to with a terrific headache. I
lay still for a few minutes and, hearing nothing but the ticking of my
watch, I cautiously got to my feet and groped for the door, as the room
was in darkness. Before I could locate it, two men, still masked,
entered, turned on the light, apologized profusely for the treatment I
had received, and said they had mistaken me for someone else. Then they
gave me something to eat, blindfolded me again, and drove me to within a
block of my home, still apologizing for the mistake. Before I could
remove my blindfold after getting out of the car, it had sped away.

‘It’s all very mysterious to me. I can’t make anything of it.’

‘I won’t give you away, Johnson,’ smiled the Professor. ‘Your wife
undoubtedly believes your yarn, but you’d better think up a better one
the next time.’


  What flaw did the Professor find in Johnson’s story which proved the
                        ‘kidnaping’ was a fake?


                                   6
                          _A Valuable Formula_

‘I had just stepped behind that screen near the door to wash my hands
when a man, gun in hand, entered the room and stood motionless for a few
seconds,’ said Hyde. ‘Apparently satisfied no one was here, he walked to
the desk over there by the window. As he rummaged through the papers in
the drawer, I hastily dialed headquarters, leaving the receiver off the
hook, trusting you would trace the call. I was afraid to talk because I
was unarmed and he looked like a desperate fellow.’

‘You say he took nothing but a valuable formula from your desk?’
inquired the Professor.

‘That’s all; he touched nothing else.’

‘Rather careless to leave such an important paper lying about like that,
wasn’t it?’

‘Well, I suppose so, though it was only a copy. I sold the original to
Schmitz yesterday for twenty thousand dollars and I intended to destroy
the duplicate tonight.’

‘Would that formula be valuable to anyone else?’

‘Yes, it would be worth twice as much to Schmitz’s competitors.’

‘Why didn’t you sell it to them in the first place, then?’

‘Schmitz financed me while I was perfecting the formula, so I thought it
only right to sell it to him, even though I could have got more for it
from the other firm.’

‘As this is such a small, bright room and you observed so much through
that crack in the screen,’ said Fordney sarcastically, ‘you should be
able to give us a _very_ good description of the intruder.’

‘Oh, I can do that,’ Hyde replied, with assurance. ‘He was a big fellow
about six feet tall and weighed around two hundred pounds. He had
jet-black hair, swarthy complexion, an unusually large nose, and a
vicious-looking mouth. As he left obviously unaware of my presence, I
noticed he had a big rip in the back of his blue coat.’

‘Well, Hyde, as part of your story is incredible, you can’t expect me to
believe any of it.’


                    Why did the Professor say this?


                                   7
                              _Strangled_

‘Twenty-two days of this hot, dry spell,’ groaned Professor Fordney. ‘I
can’t remember a stretch like it.’

‘Tell us about the Greer case, Professor,’ urged the rocking-chair
brigade. ‘It’ll take your mind off the heat.’

‘Well, you know the salient facts. The body of Irene Greer, lying on the
railroad right-of-way, was found half a mile from here by a fishing
party at 6 A.M. day before yesterday. It could be seen that she was a
beautiful girl despite the tousled hair matted with mud and a nasty
bruise on her cheek. Her flaming red dress was torn and dirty. She had
on shoes, but no stockings. Incidentally, her clothes were of the finest
quality. Her body indicated that she had received a terrific beating,
poor girl.

‘From appearances she had been placed on the track with the expectation
that she would be struck by a train and identification made impossible.
No doubt she was unconscious when this was done, but she must have
revived temporarily and crawled to the gravel right-of-way before a
train came along. There she died.

‘A peculiar circumstance is that, while her body was bruised and
twisted, there were no marks on her throat to indicate strangulation,
yet Dr. Bridewell says that was the cause of death.

‘She was found in a desolate spot. Oh, yes, she was probably strangled
with a scarf which, employed in a certain manner, would leave no outward
trace.

‘Now you folks should know how I learned Irene Greer was attacked
elsewhere and then brought to the vicinity where she was found,’ smiled
the Professor.


                                Do you?


                                   8
                         _Death in the Office_

When Professor Fordney reached Gifford’s office, he found a policeman
already there.

‘Gifford’s dead,’ he was told. ‘What brings you here?’

‘He telephoned me a few minutes ago; said he had been shot; then I had a
hard time understanding him. This street is on your beat, isn’t it?’

‘Yes. I heard the shot when I was in Smith’s cigar store. It took me a
while to locate it. The door was locked and I had to break in.’

As they walked into an inner office, they saw Gifford’s body, a bullet
through the heart, lying in a pool of blood.

Fordney stooped to pick up a revolver.

‘It’s an easy jump to the ground,’ observed the policeman, who was
standing by an open window.

‘Did you know, sir,’ he added, ‘that Gifford has been troubled lately by
blackmailers?’

‘Yes. The last time I saw him, he told me he had been shot at a couple
of weeks ago.’

Fordney walked over to the door and found the lock was sprung, but the
key still in it.

‘I suppose,’ ventured the policeman, ‘that the blackmailers got him.
They must have locked the door from the inside when they entered, shot
him, and then jumped out the window.’

‘No,’ said Fordney, who was examining the key he had removed from the
lock. ‘There weren’t any murderers in here. Gifford committed suicide.’


            Why was the Professor sure that it was suicide?


                                   9
                    _They Usually Forget Something_

‘Here is a good illustration of the old bromide that the smartest
criminal leaves some clue in even the most carefully planned crime,’
mused Professor Fordney.

‘While in Colshire, a beautiful little English village, I was asked by
the local police to assist them in a rather puzzling affair.

‘Suspicion of a particularly brutal murder had been directed toward an
illiterate underworld character. He was accused of sending the following
note found in the murdered man’s pocket:

  _sir john when i last seen you i sed i will kill you if the muney
  ain’t here by mundy; all of it_

                                _yurs truly,_
                                                                    _XX_

‘When Wellington, the Chief Constable, asked my opinion, I told him the
writer of the note, and therefore probably the murderer, was obviously
an educated man. After explaining why I was sure of that, he agreed with
me.

‘An odd sort of case. The murderer was found to be an extremely wealthy
American whose sister had married the murdered man’s brother.’

‘Well,’ laughed Bill Cargo to whom Fordney had been speaking. ‘It’s
getting too involved for me. I can’t figure it out.’


      How had Fordney determined the American was an educated man?


                                   10
                     _The Professor Gives a Lesson_

‘Cardoni came into Inspector Kelley’s office yesterday,’ said Fordney to
his Criminology Class.

‘“I want to speak to you alone, Chief,” he said, eyeing me with frank
suspicion.

‘“It’s all right. Go ahead,” said Kelley.

‘“I’ve got some information on the Curtis kidnapers. How much is it
worth?”

‘“That all depends. Let’s hear the story.”

‘“They’re in one of my old buildings, down on the East Side. Three men
and a woman. All you’ve got to do, Chief, is to take this, walk in an’
surprise ’em,” said our informer, tossing a Yale key on Kelley’s desk.
“They rented a room from me about a week ago.”

‘“Sounds much too easy, Cardoni. I want something more definite than
that. What makes you think they’re the kidnapers?”

‘“I heard them having an argument as I was doing some repair work in the
hall. One of the guys threatened to squeal if he didn’t get a bigger
cut. It sounded interestin’, so I peeked through the keyhole. They were
sittin’ at a table in the middle of the room on which there was a stack
of money.”

‘“Your story doesn’t yet show they had any connection with the Curtis
kidnaping,” Kelley said.

“NO? Well, last night I heard them mention ‘Curtis’ several times. And
that ain’t all,” continued Cardoni, with a triumphant air. “Here’s a
code message one of them must have dropped. Well, Chief, how much do I
get?”

“Get out!” hollered Kelley as he made a pass at Cardoni.’


                Why was the informer treated so rudely?


                                   11
                          _Upstairs and Down_

‘Let’s hear your story,’ said Inspector Kelley to Policeman Kirk, as
Fordney dropped into a comfortable chair at Headquarters.

‘The neighbors were worried because they hadn’t seen old lady Brill
about for a couple of days and asked me to investigate.

‘Getting no answer to my ring, I broke open the front door, ran
upstairs, and, not seeing her, ran down and through the hall, unlocked
the kitchen door, and found her on the floor, a bullet through her heart
and a gun beside her. The windows and the doors to the porch and cellar
were locked on the inside and nothing seemed to be disturbed.

‘Looked like suicide to me. However, I learned her nephew was at the
house yesterday about the time the doctor said she died, so I brought
him in,’ concluded Kirk.

‘Why did you run upstairs before examining the lower floor?’ asked
Kelley.

‘Thought I heard a noise up there, sir,’ replied the policeman.

‘Any finger-prints on the gun?’ inquired Fordney.

‘Just those of the old lady,’ answered Kelley.

‘I have a key to the house,’ interrupted the nephew. ‘I went in
yesterday, called to her, but she didn’t answer, so I thought she’d gone
out.’

‘Did you go upstairs?’ asked the Professor.

‘Yes, I ran up there, calling her name, but came right down again and
left immediately.’

‘Well, Kelley, of course it’s murder—as you probably know. I suppose
you’ll hold this fellow?’

‘I certainly intend to,’ replied the Inspector.


          How did Fordney know the old lady had been murdered?


                                   12
                              _Class Day_

‘Baklioff, in person, combined with “Grand Hotel,” had packed the
Paramount,’ said the Professor. ‘Every seat was occupied and
standing-room was at a premium. What an opening it was!’ he continued.

‘As the picture neared its end and the orchestra, under the magnificent
leadership of Baklioff, reached the climax of Mascagni’s “Cavalleria
Rusticana,” a shot rang out.

‘Inspector Kelley who accompanied me, was immediately on his feet
bellowing, “Lights!” They were quickly turned on and the picture
stopped. Warning everyone to keep his seat, we started for the back of
the theater, when a man’s body slumped out of a seat and fell almost at
our feet. A hurried examination disclosed he had been shot in the back
of the head and that he was an extremely tall man.

‘Leaving Kelley to look after things, I hurried to the operator’s booth.
When almost there, I heard another shot and knew I was too late.
Entering the small compartment, hung under the balcony, I found the
operator with a bullet through his temple and a smoking revolver by his
side.

‘“Not much to this,” I remarked, as Kelley joined me.

‘“I wonder if he got the right man,” commented the Inspector. “I don’t
understand how he could have made such a splendid shot under the
circumstances. Amazing!”’

‘Was the dead man sitting in an aisle seat?’ interrupted one of the
class.

‘Yes,’ replied Fordney.

‘Gee, that’s a good one, Professor, but I know now the one thing wrong
with your story,’ said the student.


                                Do you?


                                   13
                            _A Hot Pursuit_

‘Hello, Smith,’ said Professor Fordney as he opened the door. ‘What’s
up?’

‘Uncle Fred’s house has been robbed. He had some negotiable bonds in the
library safe and told me to stick close to home until he returned from
New York.’

‘Were they stolen?’ interrogated Fordney.

‘I’m afraid so. I was up in my bedroom about twenty minutes ago when I
heard a noise. I rushed downstairs just in time to see a man dash out of
the library. I ran after him and, as I passed the door, I noticed the
safe was open, so I suppose he got the bonds. He jumped into a waiting
automobile and I trailed him in my car which, fortunately, was standing
in front of the house, but he got away from me.’

‘Did you get his license number?’

‘No. Couldn’t see it. When I lost him in the traffic, I drove right over
here.’

‘Didn’t you keep the house locked while you were upstairs?’

‘Yes, but the burglar chiseled open a cellar window.’

‘Well, let’s go over and have a look,’ suggested Fordney.

When they reached the Smith home, they found the bonds gone.

‘Did you lock the front door when you ran out of the house?’

‘Why—er,’ replied Smith nervously, ‘the door locks automatically. I
don’t know what Uncle Fred will say when he gets back.’

‘He’ll say plenty if you tell him the story you told me,’ interrupted
the Professor. ‘I suggest you put the bonds back.’


              Where did Smith make his incriminating slip?


                                   14
                        _A Question of Identity_

Professor Fordney and three of his friends were enjoying their weekly
‘get together’ at the University Club.

‘Professor,’ said Patrie, ‘tell us something about that Yelpir murder
case you were working on.’

‘Well, gentlemen,’ he replied, in his retiring manner, ‘as you know,
Yelpir’s affairs were common knowledge, and the fact that several women
had reasons to wish him dead complicated matters a bit.

‘His body was found in his study, which opened on to a corridor. At the
other end of the corridor and directly opposite it a staircase led to
the servants’ quarters above.

‘Diana Lane, a house guest of Mrs. Yelpir at the time of the murder, was
questioned, and she appeared nervous. She insisted, however, that she
had been in her room at the time Yelpir was slain.

‘Nora, a servant, testified that, as she was descending the stairs
leading from the servants’ quarters, at midnight, she saw Diana Lane,
wearing her famous emerald pendant and dressed in an enticing black
negligée, walk down the lighted corridor to Yelpir’s room. She said she
followed a minute later and heard Diana and Yelpir violently quarreling.
She returned to the servants’ quarters and, as she opened the door of
her room, she heard a shot.

‘In the face of such evidence, Miss Lane admitted having gone to the
study at the time, but protested her innocence, declaring she had
remained only a minute.

‘While Miss Lane was acquitted, you know, her reputation was not above
reproach. Even so, I knew without further investigation that Nora’s
testimony was maliciously false.’


                      How did the Professor know?


                                   15
                         _A Yachtsman’s Alibi_

‘I’ve often remarked,’ said Professor Fordney, in an expansive mood,
‘how very difficult it is to fake an alibi without someone’s assistance.
A case in point is a messy affair we cleared up recently.

‘I didn’t definitely suspect Picus when I happened to bump into him at
the Fourth-of-July parade, the morning after an acquaintance of his had
been found dead under suspicious circumstances. I rather casually asked
him where he had been and what he had been doing the previous afternoon
about four o’clock, the apparent time of the man’s death. He related the
following story:

‘“I took my sailboat out about noon yesterday. It was great on the
water. Around three o’clock, however, when I was perhaps ten miles out,
the wind died down completely. There wasn’t a breath of air, and I knew
that, unless I could attract some boat, I was in for an uncomfortable
time. Remembering that the international distress signal is a flag flown
upside down, I ran mine up to the top of the mast in that manner. Thank
God it was a clear day.

‘“In about an hour the steamer Leone hove to, and I went aboard her
after securing my boat with a towline. The Captain said he had seen my
distress signal about four miles away and would put me ashore at
Gladsome Landing. He did so, and, as there was no one about, I hailed a
passing motorist who gave me a lift back to town. Imagine my surprise
when I read in the paper this morning that the Leone had been sunk in a
storm after putting me ashore, and all hands had been lost!”

‘While I knew,’ remarked the Professor, ‘that the Leone had been sunk
with all on board, after hearing Picus’s story I immediately arrested
him on suspicion of murder.’


                   What was wrong with Picus’s alibi?


                                   16
                        _Murder at Coney Island_

Inspector Kelley and Professor Fordney were seated in the former’s
office when Policeman Fanning and his charge entered. After Fanning’s
hurried explanation, Jasper told his story:

‘I’m the ticket taker on a merry-go-round at Coney Island. This bein’
Saturday, we had a big crowd. The trip was almost over when I reached
out, saying, “Ticket, please,” and I see this woman sittin’ up in the
middle of the chariot with that terrible look on her face. She didn’t
answer, and when I shook her, she slumped over in the corner. I
screamed, jumped off, and ran for the manager. I got blood on my hand
when I shook her.

‘Yes, sir, she’d ridden a couple of times and I seen the man she was
with on the two rides before,’ continued Jasper, giving a detailed
description of him. ‘I happened to see him jump off just before I got to
her.’

‘The doctor said she had been stabbed through the heart and had died
instantly?’ queried Professor Fordney.

‘That’s right, sir,’ replied the policeman.

‘It seems strange, Jasper,’ remarked the Professor, ‘that you can give
such a good description of this woman’s companion on two previous rides
when you just “happened” to notice him jump off. Does the merry-go-round
ever make you dizzy?’

‘No, sir; I’m used to it.’

‘Well, Inspector,’ said Fordney, turning to his friend, ‘I suppose you
are going to hold this man?’

‘Certainly,’ replied Kelley. ‘That’s just about the dizziest story I’ve
heard in a long time.’


              What justified the police in holding Jasper?


                                   17
                              _Too Clever_

‘Receiving no reply to my ring and finding the door unlocked, I went
in,’ said Albert Lynch. ‘Dawson was seated at his desk shot through the
head. Seeing he was dead, I called the police and remained here.’

‘Touch anything, Lynch?’ asked Professor Fordney.

‘No, sir, nothing.’

‘Positive of that, are you?’

‘Absolutely, sir.’

The Professor made a careful examination of the desk and found Dawson
had been writing a letter at the bottom of which and covered by the dead
man’s hand, was a penned message: ‘A. L. did thi——’ and weakly trailed
off.

Further examination disclosed several kinds of writing-paper, a pen-tray
holding the recently used pen, inkwell, eraser, stamps, letters, and
bills. The gun from which the shot had been fired was on the floor by
the side of the chair, and the bullet was found embedded in the divan.

After a few questions, Fordney was quickly convinced of Lynch’s
innocence.

‘What do you make of it, Professor?’ inquired Inspector Kelley.

‘Though the scrawled note certainly looks like Dawson’s writing, I am
sure an expert will find it isn’t. I’m not surprised to find the gun
free of prints. Pretty thorough job, this. Good thing for you, Lynch,
and for us too, that the murderer was careless about something.’

‘Right,’ said Kelley. ‘But you aren’t such a wise old owl, Fordney. This
is like the Morrow case we handled. Remember?’

‘Good for you, Inspector,’ laughed the Professor.


 How did both men so quickly determine that the incriminating note had
                        not been left by Dawson?


                                   18
                            _Bloody Murder_

‘A bad mess, this,’ said Professor Fordney to Sergeant Reynolds, as they
viewed the bloody scene.

‘Yeah, I wish these guys wouldn’t be quite so thorough when they bump
themselves off,’ replied Reynolds as he set grimly to work.

A man with his throat cut, the head almost severed, sat slumped over a
blood-spattered desk. What a horrible sight! His bloodstained coat flung
across the room, the razor! the shirt! the tie! his hands! covered with
blood, made a ghastly and awesome picture framed by the flickering light
of a dying candle.

After turning on the lights, Fordney bent down to take a closer look at
the man.

‘His face seems vaguely familiar, Sergeant, but I can’t recall at the
moment where I’ve seen him. How long has he been dead, Doctor?’

‘About two hours,’ replied the police surgeon.

At this moment the telephone rang. The caller, upon hearing Fordney’s
voice, immediately disconnected.

‘Odd,’ murmured the Professor as he hung up the receiver. ‘I remember
now where I saw this man. His name is Thompson.’

As he glanced around, he observed that the alarm-clock on the dresser
had stopped just two hours and fifteen minutes before.

The telephone rang again and Fordney motioned Reynolds to answer.

‘Hello!’ he said. ‘Mr. Thompson stepped out for a few minutes. Leave
your number. I’ll have him call you.’ The man at the other end inquired
who was speaking and, when Reynolds replied, ‘A friend,’ he hung up.

‘Better trace that call, Sergeant; this is murder,’ said Fordney.

‘What!’ exclaimed Reynolds. ‘Still looks like suicide to me!’


           Do you agree with Reynolds or the Professor? Why?


                                   19
                           _Death Back-Stage_

Claudia Mason, beautiful and popular young actress, was found lying
across the chaise-longue in her elaborately furnished dressing-room,
dead from a bullet wound in the temple.

She had sold her jewels and, with an heroic gesture, partially paid her
many debts.

Near Claudia’s right hand, Sergeant Reynolds picked up the revolver with
which she had been killed, and after careful examination said:

‘No finger-prints, of course. Gosh, Fordney, there’s two rocks she
didn’t sell,’ he exclaimed, pointing to a large emerald on her left hand
and a diamond on her right.

‘Call Maria, her maid. I want to find out who this fellow is,’ said the
Professor, nodding toward a man’s photograph signed, Juan. ‘This was
evidently addressed to him,’ he said, passing over a note which read:

  Dear Juan:

  I am so despondent. The money from my jewels was not nearly enough.

                                                                 Claudia

‘Not many of these dames kill themselves over their debts,’ muttered
Reynolds as he went to call Maria.

The maid entered the room, sobbing and hysterical.

‘Who is Juan?’ asked Professor Fordney.

‘He’s the leading man in the show.’

‘Why wasn’t this note delivered to him?’

‘I forgot it.’

‘You found her?’

‘Yes. When I came to help her dress she—was—like that!’

‘Is Juan in his dressing-room now?’

‘I believe so.’

When Reynolds brought him into Claudia’s room, he dropped to his knees
beside the dead girl.

‘My God! She’s killed herself!’

‘No, she hasn’t, young man. She was murdered,’ said the Professor.


                  Why was he sure it was not suicide?


                                   20
                         _An Easy Combination_

‘I was working late, preparing an advertising campaign,’ continued
Fellows whom Professor Fordney had been questioning. ‘About ten-fifteen
I heard the outer office door click. Being unarmed, I hurriedly turned
out the lights in my office and waited breathlessly, as there was a
large sum of money in the safe. I knew my chances of attracting
attention from the tenth floor were small, so, reaching for the
telephone, I hastily dialed Headquarters and told them in a low voice to
send help immediately. Then, creeping noiselessly to the open safe, I
gently shut the door, twirled the combination, and crawled behind that
big old-fashioned desk.

‘Shortly afterward the robber entered my office, flashed his light over
the place, and went to the safe. He had it open in a few minutes, took
the money, and left. That’s all I know about it.’

‘What time is it now, Mr. Fellows?’ inquired Fordney.

‘Why, I haven’t a watch.’

‘How, then, did you know it was about ten-fifteen when you heard the
door click?’

‘I had gone next door for a sandwich and as I left I glanced at the
restaurant clock and noticed it was ten-five. I had been back about five
minutes,’ replied Fellows.

‘You say the burglar was masked,’ continued the Professor. ‘How did you
know it?’

‘As he focused his flashlight on the combination and bent over, I saw
the mask,’ returned Fellows belligerently.

‘Very interesting,’ smiled Fordney, ‘but you’ll have to be a better liar
than that, Fellows, to fool me.’


                Where did the Professor detect the lie?


                                   21
                           _A Modern Knight_

‘There was hardly a breath of air as we sat on the terrace enjoying
tea,’ reminisced Professor Fordney. ‘Rocca excused himself, saying he
wished to telephone. Shortly after he entered the house, we heard a
shot. I rushed into the drawing-room and found Rocca, smoking gun in
hand, staring dumbly at the chair in front of the open window which held
the huddled body of Chase.

‘A hasty examination disclosed the telephone receiver off the hook, a
single cigarette stub of Rocca’s brand in the ash-tray, a bullet-hole in
the gauze curtain six inches below the window-sill, and Rocca’s open
cigarette-case in Chase’s lap. His replies to my hastily put questions
were evasive. Inspector Kelley arrived while I was talking and took up
the questioning.’

‘“Did you use the telephone?”

‘“Yes.”

‘“You came directly to this room and did not leave it?”

‘“Yes.”

‘“Chase was engaged to your sister?”

‘“Yes, he was.”

‘“Did you offer Chase a cigarette?”

‘“I did.”

‘“How did that dent get in your cigarette-case?”

‘“I dropped it about a week ago.”

‘“Did you shoot Chase?”

‘“I refuse to answer that question.”

‘At this point the doctor arrived and located the bullet in Chase’s
body. Rocca then admitted Chase had been shot with the gun found in his
own hand, but stubbornly refused to say anything more.

‘“What’s your opinion, Professor?” Kelley asked.

‘“Well,” I replied, “Rocca is obviously shielding someone. We have
positive proof he came directly here and has not left this room. That,
combined with the other evidence discovered, absolutely exonerates
Rocca."’


          How did the Professor know Rocca had not shot Chase?


                                   22
                          _The Jewel Robbery_

‘You say that as your butler called for help, a stranger, by the name of
Dudley, was passing the house and rushed in?’

‘That’s right,’ Owings corroborated, as the two men sat in Fordney’s
study. ‘It was rather late last Friday evening before I was ready to
leave town for the week-end, and as Stuben, the butler, wasn’t feeling
well, I told him to stay upstairs and that I would lock up when I left.

‘I had some diamonds in the safe, so he said he wouldn’t leave the house
until I returned,’ continued Owings.

‘About eleven that night, he heard a humming noise and, having the
diamonds in mind, ran downstairs to investigate. Finding the wall safe
open and the jewels gone, he let out a scream for help.

‘Stuben has been with me for years, Professor, and I have implicit faith
in him.’

‘Did Dudley see anyone leave?’ asked Fordney.

‘No; the robber or robbers must have left by the back door, as Dudley
was right in front of the house when he heard Stuben’s call for help,’
replied Owings. ‘Both men say the room smelled of cigarette smoke, so
the burglars must have just left.’

‘Was the back door unlocked?’ inquired the Professor.

‘No, it was closed. It has a device which locks it automatically from
the outside when it’s pulled to.’

‘Well, you’d better swear out a warrant for your butler and Dudley,’
said Fordney. ‘I’m sure they know where your diamonds are. Long service,
you know, isn’t necessarily a pledge of loyalty.’


                   Why did Fordney so advise Owings?


                                   23
                     _Before the Coroner’s Inquest_

‘Let’s run over your testimony before the inquest opens,’ said Fordney.

‘All right,’ replied Curry.

‘About three-thirty on Thursday, I got into the boat in front of my
cottage and rowed upstream. About fifty yards below the bridge, I looked
up and saw Scott and Dawson going across it in opposite directions. As
the two men passed, Scott reached out, grabbed Dawson, and hit him in
the jaw. Then he pulled a gun, and, in the scuffle that followed, Scott
fell off the bridge. He dropped into the water, but, as the current was
strong, by the time I reached the spot, he had sunk. When I finally
pulled him into the boat, he was dead.’

‘Was it a clear day?’ asked Fordney.

‘Well, it had been showering early in the afternoon, but the sun was
shining then.’

‘Are you positive Scott got that bruise by hitting his head on the rocks
when he fell? The prosecution, you know, is going to claim that Dawson
hit him on the head with something, then deliberately pushed him off the
bridge,’ commented Fordney.

‘I _know_ he got that bruise on the rocks,’ stated Curry emphatically.

‘All right,’ said the Professor, ‘but I don’t think the jury will
believe you. Personally, I’m sure Dawson didn’t intentionally kill
Scott, but we’ll have to have better proof than that if we hope to
acquit him.

‘By the way,’ he continued, ‘be sure to state you knew of the grudge
Scott bore Dawson.’


Why was the Professor doubtful the coroner’s jury would believe Curry’s
                               testimony?


                                   24
                       _The Fifth Avenue Hold-Up_

‘What’s the hurry?’ asked Professor Fordney, as Baldwin collided with
him in the doorway of the office at the back of the exclusive Cross
Jewelry Store.

‘I—I—was going to help search for the robbers,’ stammered Baldwin as he
backed into the office.

‘Well, tell me what happened first,’ said Fordney, as Dr. Lyman, police
surgeon, knelt beside Mr. Cross.

‘There’s the special safe for the emerald behind that miniature
portrait. I was in here when Mr. Cross entered with two gentlemen,’
exclaimed Baldwin nervously.

‘He asked me to bring in a tray of diamonds. I set it on the table—both
men pulled guns and as Cross protested, one of them knocked him
unconscious with a blow on the head. The other forced me into that chair
saying, “All right, buddy. We’ll wait on ourselves.” Then he put the
diamonds in his pocket. I’m thankful I’m alive. I telephoned
Headquarters, then rushed out into the store, but they had escaped,’
concluded Baldwin.

‘So they got away with the famous Cross emerald, eh?’

‘Yes. The safe door was slightly open. Mr. Cross tried to call my
attention to it with a jerk of his thumb as the robber pocketed the
diamonds. Otherwise they wouldn’t have discovered it.’

‘How is he, Doctor?’ asked Fordney.

‘He’ll never come to, I’m afraid. Those two blows on the head were a bit
too much for him.’

‘Two blows!’ ejaculated Fordney. ‘Are you sure, Baldwin, you weren’t
hurrying away with the emerald? I’m not!’


         Why did Fordney think Baldwin had stolen the emerald?


                                   25
                         _Behind Locked Doors_

At the Collingham home Professor Fordney found Clive Kingston, the
Judge’s nephew, and Watkins, the butler, greatly excited. Forcing the
library door, locked for three months, they saw the Judge seated in
front of the fireplace opposite the door, apparently dead.

‘Wait!’ called Professor Fordney to Watkins, who had rushed into the
room.

‘He’s all right,’ said Kingston, as he and Fordney halted over the
threshold.

‘Perhaps, but I don’t want any clues obliterated. Come back carefully
and get us a couple of small rugs, Watkins,’ commanded Fordney.

Walking only on the rugs placed over the thick, plain carpet, Fordney
and Kingston reached the Judge’s side and found him dead—shot through
the heart.

Kingston called the Professor’s attention to footprints in the carpet
near the fireplace. As he fitted his shoe to an impression, he said,
‘These are mine, and those, of course, must be Watkins’s.’

‘Throw me your shoe,’ called Fordney to the butler, standing in the
doorway. ‘Yes, these are yours all right, and I can see the third set
was made by the Judge—notice the impression left by his peculiarly
constructed right shoe.’

‘There’s the gun under the table,’ called the butler.

‘Pretty sharp eyes, Watkins,’ said the Professor, picking up and
critically examining the gun. ‘No finger-prints, of course,’ he mused.

‘Look!’ exclaimed Kingston, ‘the glass in that picture is broken. Were
two shots fired?’

‘Only one,’ said Fordney, as with great care he picked the Judge’s
nose-glasses from his lap where they had fallen, unbroken. ‘I think I
know now who murdered your uncle.’


                   Whom did Fordney suspect, and why?


                                   26
                             _Lost at Sea_

‘Tell us exactly what happened,’ said Professor Fordney as he sat in his
study with Mrs. Rollins.

‘It was a dark, moonless night.

‘At twelve o’clock, when we were about ten miles off Point Breeze, I
retired to my cabin, leaving my husband on deck. We were alone on the
boat.

‘In a few minutes, hearing loud shouts, I joined him again. We could
hear a boat approaching, running without lights, as were we. My husband
told me to return to the cabin, which I did.

‘Soon after doing so a bump, tramping feet, and loud swearing told me
our visitors had come aboard. I went up and, just as I stepped on deck,
a man put a gun against my ribs and told me to keep quiet. My husband
was engaged in a terrific fight with two others.

‘They must have known he always carried that leather bag of loose
diamonds because, when he dropped it in the fight, one of them picked it
up from the deck.

‘They finally knocked him unconscious and took him to their boat after
binding and gagging me. As you know, I was found drifting next morning
by that fisherman.’

‘How was your husband dressed?’ inquired Fordney.

‘It was very hot—he had no shirt on, but wore dark trousers.’

‘Shoes or tennis slippers?’

‘Why—shoes, of course,’ replied Mrs. Rollins with noticeable hesitation.

‘Well,’ said Fordney tersely, ‘it’s amazing to me that you expect to
collect insurance on your diamonds on such a flimsy yarn. You and your
husband will be lucky if you aren’t prosecuted.’


                Where did the elaborate story fall down?


                                   27
                            _A Suave Gunman_

‘Can you describe this fellow?’ asked Professor Fordney of Henry Taylor,
manager of the National Theater.

‘Yes. He was a tall, well-dressed, good-looking chap. Wore a panama hat,
turned-down brim, blue coat, smart blue tie, natty white flannels with
silver belt-buckle, black-and-white sport shoes, and had a general air
of culture and refinement.’

‘Just what did he do?’

‘As I was counting the receipts, he came into the office, gun in hand,
and commanded me to get up from the desk and move over by that table.

‘After putting the money in a brief-case he carried, he took out a
cigarette and asked me to light it for him, still covering me, of
course.

‘Then he gagged me and tied me to the chair, after which he opened the
door, looked cautiously about, came back and, with a quiet “sorry” and a
warning, turned and left. As he passed through the door, he unbuttoned
his coat and slipped the revolver into his back pocket. The show was
just letting out, so I suppose he mingled with the crowd and escaped,’
Taylor concluded.

‘Are you insured against this loss of eight thousand dollars?’ inquired
Fordney.

‘Yes.’

‘Could you see the color of the bandit’s hair?’

‘It was blond.’

‘Anything unusual about him?’

‘No. Except that he was constantly clearing his throat in a peculiar
manner,’ replied Taylor.

‘Left- or right-handed?’

‘Why—I’m not sure. Right-handed, though, I think.’

‘This has gone far enough, Taylor,’ said Fordney sharply. ‘The robbery
was obviously framed by you.’


           How did Fordney know Taylor had faked the hold-up?


                                   28
                           _Accidental Death_

Returning to town late one night, Professor Fordney was driving along an
unfrequented road when the sight of a motor-cycle policeman examining a
car in a ditch caused him to stop and offer his services. Joining the
policeman, he found that a man, obviously the driver, had been thrown
through the windshield and was lying about six feet from the car.

His examination disclosed that the man had been terribly cut about the
head. The jugular vein was completely severed. The bent steering-wheel,
shattered glass, and the blood on the front seat and floor of the car
were mute evidence of the tragedy.

Fordney also noted the speedometer had stopped at 62.

A search of the body revealed nothing unusual except that the man wore
only one glove. The other could not be found. The Professor was
pondering this when the policeman handed him his report of accidental
death, saying, ‘Is that how you see it, sir?’

‘I think,’ replied Fordney slowly, ‘you’d better change that to murder.
In the absence of any further evidence, it seems to be pretty clearly
indicated.’

‘Murder!’ exclaimed the bewildered policeman. ‘I don’t understand how
you make that out.’

After explaining his reason and with a final admonition to continue a
careful search for the missing glove, the Professor returned to his car
and drove down the wide, smooth highway toward home and a good night’s
rest.

Fordney’s deduction was confirmed when the missing glove and the
murderer were found.


            How had he arrived at his startling conclusion?


                                   29
                              _Easy Money_

‘Mr. Walker hurried into the kitchen,’ said the valet to Professor
Fordney, ‘and told me he was called away unexpectedly and that I was to
go to his library and take the money he had won last night to the bank.

‘I was busy,’ he continued, ‘but in about five minutes I went through
the hall, and, thinking I heard a noise, I stopped and listened at the
study door. There was someone moving about. The door was open. As I
peered around it, I saw a masked man, gun in hand, hesitating near the
fireplace.

‘Then he went over to the table in the center of the room, picked up the
stacks of ten- and twenty-dollar bills, and left by the window. I called
the police immediately and gave them a description.’

‘Exactly what time was that?’ asked Fordney.

‘Just about ten o’clock, sir.’

‘Had you been in the library before that, this morning?’

‘No, I hadn’t.’

‘Were you in your master’s room today?’

‘No. What’s that got to do with it?’

‘Nothing,’ murmured Fordney, ‘nothing at all! Does your master gamble
often?’

‘I don’t think so.’

‘How much did he win last night?’

‘He didn’t say.’

‘Humph,’ said Fordney, as he pointed to a bill on the floor, ‘the thief
dropped one.

‘I see your master has quite a library,’ he continued, glancing around
the large, beautifully furnished room. ‘Do you read much, Wilkins?’

‘A bit, sir.’

‘Did you ever read, “Honesty is the best policy”?’


       Why did the Professor think Wilkins had robbed his master?


                                   30
                         _Robbery at High Noon_

‘I wonder who had the nerve to commit such a robbery at high noon,’
mused Professor Fordney as he examined the safe, seventeen minutes after
it had been rifled. ‘Same old story: no finger-prints, no evidence.’

‘Found anything?’ asked Lawson nervously as he entered his drawing-room.

‘Not yet. Are you here alone, Lawson?’

‘No. John, my nephew, is staying with me. Everyone else is in town.’

‘Where is he now?’

‘Oh, he left about an hour ago.’

At 3.20 P.M. Fordney noticed Jones, the gardener, working at the edge of
a flower-bed. He kept looking furtively at the house while he
frantically covered over the hole he had dug. Finishing, he hurriedly
walked toward the boat-landing.

Fordney, following, reached the dock just as John guided his motor-boat
in.

‘Have a nice day?’ asked Fordney.

‘Yep. Had a grand run up the lakes.’

‘Where were you when your uncle’s safe was robbed?’

‘Boy, I was hauling in a big muskie! What a battle he gave me! See him
in the end of the boat? Isn’t he a beauty?’

‘When did you return?’ demanded Fordney of the gardener.

‘I don’t know what time it was,’ he replied nervously, glancing at John.

‘You must have some idea.’

‘Well, it was about noon,’ he reluctantly answered.

‘By the way, John, do you know the combination of your uncle’s safe?’
inquired Fordney.

‘Is that old weasel accusing me?’

‘No, he isn’t. But I’ve got my suspicions!’


                   Whom did Fordney suspect and why?


                                   31
                        _The Wrong Foot Forward_

‘The witness says,’ explained the interpreter, ‘that as the car came to
a sudden stop the conductor ran to the front and yelled to the motorman,
“You’ve done it again."’

The little foreigner on the witness stand looked bewildered and
frightened.

‘He further says that there were two sailors on the car and that they
jumped off and ran.’

‘Have they been located yet?’ inquired the Judge.

‘No, Your Honor; we’ve been unable to trace them, although the conductor
gave a good description,’ replied counsel.

‘Proceed.’

The interpreter continued.

‘Paslovsky, the witness, declares he had a clear view of the plaintiff
when he got off. He states that just as the plaintiff put his foot on
the ground, with his back to the front of the car, it gave a sudden
start and he was thrown to the road.’

‘Can’t the witness understand or speak enough English to tell the court
about that?’ asked the Judge.

‘No, Your Honor; he’s been in this country only two weeks.’

‘How can he get about at that hour of night alone, then?’

‘Some friends put him on the car and telephoned the people with whom he
lives to meet him at the end of the line,’ replied counsel for the
plaintiff.

‘Continue.’

‘Paslovsky,’ declared the interpreter, ‘says he picked up this picture
from the floor of the car—a snapshot of a sailor and a girl.’

‘Case dismissed,’ thundered the Judge, ‘and don’t ever bring another
like that into this court.’


  ‘Why was His Honor justified in so abruptly dismissing the suit for
                               damages?’

asked Professor Fordney of his class in criminology.


                                   32
                       _Death Attends the Party_

‘He had a big party last night,’ said Graves, the valet.

‘Certainly looks like it,’ retorted Professor Fordney, as he surveyed
the crazily balanced glasses, overflowing ash-trays, and liquor rings on
the small, fragile antique table at which Carlton Dawes sat.

‘It was awful, sir. Just as I turned to say “good night” to him, he
lifted his revolver, fired and toppled over.’

‘Funny,’ mused Fordney. ‘He had everything to live for.’

‘Everything but the thing he wanted,’ replied the valet. ‘Madeline, his
former wife, was here last night. He is always despondent after seeing
her.’

‘Well, Graves, pretty nice for you, eh? How much did he leave you?’

‘Ten thousand dollars, sir.’

Fordney leaned over to examine the wound in Dawes’s left temple. His
head rested on the edge of the table, his right hand on his knee and his
left hung lifelessly at his side.

‘Anything been touched since the tragedy?’

‘No, sir.’

Fordney picked up Dawes’s revolver where it had apparently fallen from
his hand. After examining it and finding only the dead man’s
finger-prints, he laid it on the table. As he did so, Madeline entered
the room. She stopped, horrified.

‘What—what—has happened?’

‘Where did you come from?’ demanded Fordney.

‘I’ve been upstairs. I didn’t leave with the guests.’

‘Humph—you should have,’ as he shot her a quizzical look. ‘Your presence
may prove embarrassing. Your ex-husband was murdered.’

Madeline slipped to the floor in a dead faint.


                 What convinced Fordney it was murder?


                                   33
                              _No Way Out_

On a battered desk in the small, dark room lay a penciled note in
handwriting resembling that of the dead man:

  Dear John:

  You know the trouble I’m in. There’s only one way out and I’m taking
  it. You’re my pal and will understand. Good luck.

                                                        (Signed)    Paul

The only other furniture consisted of the chair in which Paul Morrow had
been found with his throat cut, a bed, and a highly ornate and
apparently brand-new waste-basket. It had been definitely established
that the dead man had not left the room during the twenty-four hours
before he was discovered.

Finishing his examination of the contents of the man’s pockets—two
twenty-dollar bills, a cheap watch, and an expensive wallet in which
there was a picture of a beautiful woman—Fordney turned his attention to
the meager inventory of the room.

‘That’s all we can find,’ said Inspector Kelley, indicating a
dictionary, scraps of a letter in a feminine handwriting found in the
ornate waste-basket, a pen, some cheap stationery, a few clothes, pipe
and tobacco, and a bloody, razor-sharp knife. ‘Certainly has all the
appearances of suicide,’ he continued. ‘This door was locked and no one
could have left by that window. What do you make of it, Fordney?’

The Professor didn’t reply at once. He picked up the photograph, studied
it a moment, and then, with a slow, searching look around the small
room, said:

‘Better try to piece those bits of letter together. This isn’t suicide;
it’s murder.’

‘I believe you’re right,’ exclaimed Kelley, with dawning comprehension.


                What brought Fordney to this conclusion?


                                   34
                           _Midnight Murder_

‘Who are you, and what’s this all about?’ demanded Inspector Kelley, as
he and Professor Fordney arrived at the apartment in answer to a call.

‘I’m Jack Day. I share this apartment with Al Quale. I returned from the
theater, shortly after midnight, went into his room, and found him lying
there on the bed. When I saw he was dead, I called Headquarters at once.
God, this is terrible!’

‘Those your things on the bed?’ asked Kelley, indicating a blood-stained
muffler, a hat, gloves, and cane.

‘Yes, I tossed them there before I rushed to the telephone. Got that
blood on the muffler when I bent over him.’

‘What time did you leave here this evening?’

‘Shortly before seven,’ replied Day.

‘Can you prove you were at the theater all evening?’ demanded Kelley.

‘Why, yes, I went with a friend.’

‘He’s been dead about six hours, Inspector,’ said the police surgeon,
finishing his examination at this point. ‘A deep knife wound, below the
heart.’

As Fordney picked up an earring from the floor, Day exclaimed: ‘Why,
that belongs to his fiancée.’

‘Well, there’ll be no wedding bells for him,’ remarked Kelley, with a
start as he discovered that Day’s cane was a sword-stick with a long,
thin, shining blade.

‘Any blood, Inspector?’ asked Fordney.

‘None. Clean as a whistle.’

‘Well, Day, looks mighty bad for you,’ stated the Professor. ‘I don’t
know yet whether you killed him with that cane, or whether you killed
him at all, but I do know you were here a few minutes after he was
stabbed.’


                      How did the Professor know?


                                   35
                          _Speakeasy Stick-Up_

‘I had counted the cash, and as I was working the combination to open
the wall safe I heard this guy in back of me say, “Get ’em up, Bo. This
is a stick-up.” I reached for the ceiling as he says, “Make a move and
I’ll drill you!” He didn’t sound like he was foolin’, so I kept quiet.

‘Well, he comes over, gives me a prod with his gun, pockets the dough,
and asks me where the best liquor is, saying he don’t want no bar
whiskey either. I told him and he poured himself a drink.

‘Then he got real sociable-like, but wouldn’t let me take my hands down.
He kept on talkin’ and makin’ wise-cracks, but finally got tired, I
guess.

‘With a warnin’ that, if I moved before I could count twenty, my wife
would be a widow, he beat it,’ concluded Sullivan.

‘How much did he take?’ inquired Professor Fordney, who had entered the
speakeasy after hearing the bartender’s call for help.

‘About five hundred dollars,’ Sullivan replied. ‘We had a good day.’

‘Haven’t you a gun here?’

‘Sure, but I didn’t have a chance. I ain’t exactly no boy scout, but
this mug was too big and tough-lookin’ for me to tackle.’

‘How did you get that cut on your hand?’ inquired the Professor. ‘And
that bruise on your finger?’

‘Opening a case of lemons,’ answered Sullivan.

‘Well,’ said Fordney, ‘if your whiskey isn’t any better than your
attempt at a fake hold-up, I’ll have ginger ale.’

You’re right. The bruise had nothing to do with it, but:


             How did Fordney know the stick-up was a fake?


                                   36
                             _Behind Time_

Professor Fordney, on his way to investigate a case of blackmail, was
musing on the perversity of human nature when a jar threw him into the
aisle as the train came to a sudden stop. Jumping off, he rushed ahead
of the engine, where he found a small crowd gathered about the mutilated
body of a man hit by the train. He was identified by a card in his
pocket as John Nelson, an important figure in railroad labor circles.

‘How did it happen?’ inquired Fordney.

‘Well,’ replied Morton, the engineer, ‘I was running twelve minutes late
when I hit him. There are several miles of straight-away along here and
I was beating it along at sixty miles trying to make up time. Didn’t see
him until we were about ten yards away, right on top of him. I jammed on
the brakes, of course, but it was too late.’

‘Did you leave New York on time?’

‘Yes, sir. One-thirty exactly.’

‘Why were you running late?’

‘We were held in a block for about fifteen minutes outside of New
Haven.’

‘What was your fireman doing when you hit this man?’

‘Stoking the boiler.’

‘You say it was just a few seconds after four-ten when you hit him?’
demanded the Professor.

‘That’s right,’ agreed Morton.

‘Did you know this man by any chance?’

‘Yes, slightly—he was an officer in my union,’ replied the engineer,
with a worried look.

‘Well,’ said Fordney, ‘I don’t know your object in telling such a story,
or how you hoped to get away with it—you won’t.’


        What justified Fordney in recommending Morton’s arrest?


                                   37
                         _A Broken Engagement_

‘Peculiar,’ murmured Fordney, as he examined the desk on which lay seven
letters ready for mailing, three gray, one lavender, two pink, and one
lemon-colored.

As he idly shaped the wax of the candle standing on the desk, he
continued to ponder this unusual choice of color in stationery.

One of the letters was addressed to Dot Dalton, who had been murdered
between eleven-forty and eleven-fifty. She was one of the guests at this
house party in the Adirondacks.

All the letters were closed with black sealing wax stamped with the
letter ‘F.’

At midnight, Fordney began his questioning.

‘What time did you retire?’ he asked Molly Fleming, in whose bedroom he
was seated.

‘About ten,’ she replied.

‘Was your door locked?’

‘Yes.’

‘Hear any disturbance?’

‘No; I was tired, fell asleep almost immediately, and didn’t awaken
until you knocked on my door a few minutes ago and told me of the
tragedy.’

‘Why did you write to Dot?’

‘I didn’t see her last night and knew she intended leaving early this
morning. Jack Fahey broke our engagement yesterday and told me he was
going to marry Dot. My letter was to tell her just how despicable I
thought she was in luring him away from me. He didn’t love her. Of
course, I’m sorry she’s dead, but a lot of wives will feel safer.’

‘Why the various colors of stationery?’ inquired the Professor.

‘Oh, I always write in a color that seems to reflect the personality of
my correspondent.’

‘I see,’ said Fordney; ‘but unless you have a better alibi you’ll be
held under serious suspicion.’


  Why was the Professor practically certain Molly was involved in this
                            horrible murder?


                                   38
                        _The Holden Road Murder_

‘What a night!’ sighed Professor Fordney as he hung up the telephone
receiver. Half an hour later, still grumbling, he splashed his way
through the mud and rain to the door of 27 Holden Road. Removing his
rubbers in the spotless vestibule, he stepped into a large,
well-furnished living-room running the entire width of the house.
Introducing himself and explaining he would question everyone later, he
asked to be left alone.

In the far corner of the room he found a man lying on the floor, his
throat cut. As he bent over, his attention was attracted to a dime lying
about five feet from the head of the dead man. He picked it up, regarded
it curiously, and, with a thoughtful look, put it in his pocket.

The Professor began his questioning with the butler.

‘You found the dead man?’

‘Yes, sir, I was returning from posting a letter about thirty minutes
ago and, just as I was coming up the path of the front door, I heard a
scream, dashed in, and found Mr. White here gasping his last breath.’

‘Lose a dime?’ inquired Fordney mildly.

‘Why, I don’t think so, sir,’ replied the butler nervously.

‘I heard the scream from upstairs,’ volunteered Cannon, owner of the
house, ‘and ran in here right behind Wilkins.’

‘Did either of you leave this room before I arrived?’

‘No,’ replied Cannon; ‘we stayed here until you came.’

‘Did you, Mr. Cannon, lose a dime? No? Well,’ remarked Fordney, ‘it
looks like collusion to me and I can tell you Inspector Kelley won’t
swallow this story.’


                     What was wrong with the story?


                                   39
                           _Fishermen’s Luck_

‘Having these stones in my possession, Professor Fordney, isn’t proof
that I had any part in the Morris robbery.’

‘I know all about your story, Holmes. Found the jewels yesterday at
three o’clock in the lake, tied up in a chamois bag, didn’t you? But
what were you doing out in an open boat in the cloudburst that lasted
all yesterday afternoon?’

‘It was because of that cloudburst that I sallied forth,’ explained
Holmes confidently. ‘Perfect fishing weather, so I jumped into my boat
and went across the lake for some minnows. I had rowed back to within a
few yards of shore when I just happened to notice the bag lying on the
bottom of the lake, so I landed, tipped my boat over to keep the rain
out, and waded in. Curious, you know. The water at that point was over
my waist and cold, but when I opened the bag—my courage and curiosity
were rewarded.’

‘On which side of the dock did you find it?’ asked Fordney.

Holmes pointed to a spot on the sandy bottom at the left.

‘Think I’ll talk with the minnow man,’ declared the Professor as he got
into Holmes’s boat. He rowed furiously for about fifty yards, suddenly
dropped the oars and, after glancing from the crystal-clear water to the
bottom of the boat, emitted a victorious chuckle.

‘Stupid of me not to have thought of that before,’ he mused. ‘Wonder if
Holmes is a better fisherman than he is a liar?’


             Clever fellow, Holmes. Did his story fool you?


                                   40
                         _The Unlucky Elephant_

‘Dead! Bullet-hole in right temple,’ said Sergeant Reynolds, as he knelt
by a man lying face down, a revolver clutched in his right hand.

‘All right,’ replied Inspector Kelley. ‘Let’s have a look round. Dressed
for the street, eh?’ While speaking, Kelley picked up from the floor
several fragments of glass and a right-hand glove, turned inside-out.

‘Look at this glove, Reynolds. What do you make of it? And I wonder if
that soiled handkerchief on the table belongs to him?’

‘Gee, Chief,’ said Reynolds, as he turned the body over and unbuttoned
the topcoat, ‘this is young Holman, the millionaire.’

The body was immaculately clothed in the finest custom tailoring.

‘Broke his watch, too. Stopped at eight-ten,’ continued the Sergeant, as
he removed the timepiece from the vest pocket. ‘Let’s see if those
pieces you’ve got are part of the crystal. Yep! And look at this jade
elephant at the end of the chain.

‘Bumped himself off, all right, Inspector, but I don’t get that glove
business, or that dirty handkerchief either.’

‘We’d better look round and find that other glove,’ said Kelley.

A thorough search failed to disclose it, and while the Inspector was
confident it was suicide, he decided to get Professor Fordney’s opinion,
because of the prominence of young Holman.

After explaining the situation to the Professor over the telephone, he
was puzzled at his reply:

‘I’ll be right around, Inspector. From what you’ve told me, it looks
like murder.’


   What justified the Professor’s belief that it was probably murder?


                                   41
                        _The Professor Listens_

‘Why the rush to get back to New York?’ inquired Fordney, a few minutes
after Delavin stepped from the plane. ‘Thought you intended spending the
summer in Cuba.’

‘Well, if you must know, my bank failed, and I came back to straighten
out my affairs.’

‘That’s too bad, Delavin. How did you hear about it?’

He handed Fordney a clipping from the _Jacksonville Herald_:

  New York, July 5. (AP)—Foundation Bank & Trust Co., one of New York’s
  oldest banking establishments, closed its doors today...

‘Sure you didn’t come back to help your pal Ryan?’ asked the Professor.
‘He’s been in jail for two days. Ever since the Fourth-of-July bombing.
Had a letter on him signed by you asking him to get in touch with a C.
J. Wallace.

‘We traced Wallace and discovered he is with an ammunition company. When
the District Attorney heard you were on your way here, he asked me to
meet you. He thinks you know something about the bombing.’

‘In jail, huh? I didn’t know there had been a bombing. Wallace is a
cousin of mine.’

‘Where did you catch your plane?’

‘Why—er—Jacksonville, Florida. You see, I was staying at a rather remote
place and no planes serve that part of Cuba. Really had no thought of
leaving until I read of the bank failure.’

‘Well, you had better think of a more convincing alibi, before the
District Attorney questions you.’

‘Oh, I suppose somebody wired him that “Spider” McCoy met the plane when
we landed in Norfolk. He’s got nothing on me!’ exclaimed Delavin.


        What do you think of Delavin’s actions? Suspicious? Why?


                                   42
                             _Ten-Fifteen_

Professor Fordney glanced at his desk clock as he picked up the
receiver—ten-fifteen.

‘Hello!’ came the agitated voice at the other end. ‘This is Waters.
Could you come over right away? Something’s just happened that I’d like
to discuss with you. I’d appreciate it.’

‘Well,’ returned the Professor, again glancing dubiously at the clock,
‘if it’s important, I’ll be round. Good-bye.’

Twenty minutes later, he was met at the door by Waters’s secretary who
was almost incoherent in his excitement.

‘He’s dead, Professor. Dead—there in the library!’

Fordney hurried to the room and found Waters slumped over his desk with
his throat cut.

‘Well, tell me what happened,’ he said to the secretary, as he noted the
position of the body, the open window, and the cigar-ash on the rug
about six feet from Waters’s chair.

‘I came in about an hour ago, Professor, and went right upstairs to do
some work. Twenty-five minutes ago I came down and heard him talking to
you as I passed the library on my way to the pantry for a sandwich. I
was there about twenty minutes, I imagine, and, as I came back through
the hall, I happened to look in here, and there he was. I can’t imagine
who did it or how it happened,’ he concluded.

‘Have a cigar,’ offered Fordney.

‘Thanks, I will, Professor. It’ll kind of steady the nerves.’

‘And now,’ said Fordney, ‘suppose you tell me the real truth of this
affair.’


                        Why did he doubt Waters?


                                   43
                            _Rapid Transit_

‘I was beatin’ along the Boston Post Road, about fifty miles an hour,
when I looks around and sees this bird standing on the tail-gate
fumbling with the lock on the doors. I stopped as fast as I could,
jumped out, and ran round to the back. This mug had hopped off with an
armful of furs and climbed into a car that was following. His partner
even took a shot at me,’ said Sullivan, whom Professor Fordney was
questioning.

‘He must have been a very good judge. He took only the best you
carried,’ commented Fordney.

‘Yeah. Guess he was. Fur-stealin’ is a big racket these days.’

‘Why didn’t you report it at the next town instead of waiting until you
got back to the office?’

‘Well, I thought the boss wouldn’t want it to get out that the furs of
his wealthy customers had been pinched. He’s awful particular about us
usin’ our heads.’

‘Where was your helper?’

‘Just after I started out, he said he was feelin’ sick, so I told him to
go on home.’

‘Fifty miles an hour is excessive speed for that truck, isn’t it?’ asked
Fordney, examining the all-steel doors of the massive, dust-proof
moving-van.

‘She’s big, but she’ll do even better than that!’

‘Always wear those gloves when you’re working?’

‘Always,’ laughed the driver. ‘Have to keep me hands dainty, you know.’

‘I thought so,’ retorted Fordney, continuing his close examination of
the doors.

‘Come on, Sullivan, take me for a ride in that truck. I know you’re
lying.’


                      How did the Professor know?


                                   44
                    _The Professor is Disappointed_

‘What’ll I do, Professor,’ implored Vi Cargo, as Fordney examined the
ground beneath her bedroom window.

Seven A.M. A fine time to start looking for a thief! Why couldn’t women
be more careful of their jewelry!

‘I was restless all night,’ said Vi, as Fordney knelt beside a deep
impression of a man’s right shoe.

‘By Jove, I thought we’d found one of your stones,’ he said, pointing to
a leaf in the footprint. ‘Look at the sunlight glistening on those
raindrops!’

‘It was the shower that awakened me around six,’ chattered Vi. ‘It only
lasted about fifteen minutes. I dozed off again and awakened with a
start just as a man jumped to the ground, from my bedroom window.’

‘Was that just before you came for me?’

‘Yes.’

‘Are are you alone, Vi?’

‘Yes. The servants are in the country.’

‘Then why did you have all your jewels in the house?’

‘I had worn them to Mrs. De Forest’s party.’

‘Do you know anyone who smokes this brand?’ asked Fordney, picking up
from the ground an unsmoked cigarette of English manufacture.

‘Yes. Mr. Nelson, who brought me home last night. However, I threw that
one there.’

‘The thief chiseled open this window directly under your bedroom.’

‘I wondered how he got in! The doors were all locked.’

‘Come, my dear! Don’t you think you’ve treated the old Professor rather
shabbily? You women! I know your jewels are heavily insured and I also
know of your bridge debts. Who helped you fake this robbery? Nelson?’


                           Where is the clue?


                                   45
                          _A Dramatic Triumph_

A clock softly chimed eight-forty-five as Professor Fordney and
Halloway, dramatic critic of the _Times_, finished their after-dinner
coffee. They strolled leisurely to the corner and reached the Belmont
just in time for the curtain.

As the first act ended, Fordney remarked enthusiastically: ‘Halloway,
it’s magnificent! Boswell is certainly our finest dramatic actor. How he
held that audience, for forty-five minutes, from the moment the curtain
arose! That’s genius!’

The final curtain found him even more enthusiastic in his praise of
Boswell’s acting.

Learning next morning of the actor’s murder, he became personally
interested.

Sibyl Mortimer had been questioned by the police and quickly dismissed.
Her alibi appeared sound. She had an engagement with Boswell last
evening, but said he telephoned her shortly after nine breaking it, so
the police concerned themselves with his reason for doing so.

A taxi-driver, who drove Boswell and another man from the theater,
dropped them at Fifth Avenue and Sixty-Fifth Street at midnight. His
description of the man checked with that of Jenks, Boswell’s manager,
who was missing. It was learned that his reason for breaking the
engagement with Sibyl was to discuss a new contract with Jenks, about
which there had been considerable disagreement.

A charred piece of the contract was found in the actor’s fireplace, in
front of which he lay. Jenks’s cane and a vanity-case monogrammed ‘S.
M.’ were also found in the room.

Acquainted with the facts by Sergeant Reynolds, Fordney replied,

‘I’m afraid you’ve overlooked a valuable clue.’


                              What was it?


                                   46
                          _Murder at the Lake_

‘Here’s all we’ve been able to learn, Professor. I wish you’d see what
you can make of it,’ said Sheriff Darrow.

‘Garden’s cottage fronts the lake at a point about halfway between the
head and foot of its mile length.

‘A strong east wind off the lake that morning caused him and his two
guests to abandon their proposed fishing trip. Garden remained behind
while Rice and Johnson set off hiking in opposite directions.

‘Rice said that fifteen minutes later, as he was retrieving his hat
which had blown into the lake, he heard a shot and hurried to the
cottage. There he found Johnson with blood on his hands bending over
Garden, who had been shot through the heart.

‘Johnson said he had gone only about two hundred yards when he heard the
shot and rushed back. He claims he got the blood on his hands when
ascertaining if Garden were alive. He also admits moving some furniture,
although cautioned against it by Rice.

‘Fortunately for Rice, we found his hat still wet, but discovered he had
changed his shirt before the arrival of the police. He had also gone
through Garden’s desk, but said he removed nothing.

‘Both men entered through the back door, though the front entrance was
more convenient.

‘We haven’t found a gun or any other weapon and we haven’t been able to
establish a motive yet,’ concluded Darrow. ‘What do you make of it?’

‘It’s a bit muddled, Sheriff,’ replied Fordney, ‘but I would question
________ further.’


             Of whom was he definitely suspicious—and why?


                                   47
                     _The Professor Studies a Coat_

‘They covered us with a gun, and when the cashier tried to give an
alarm, they shot him. Then they handcuffed me, grabbed five stacks of
bills, and beat it.’

‘Calm yourself,’ ordered Fordney, ‘and tell me who “they” are.’

‘Two fellows who robbed the bank just now,’ explained the excited
narrator, who had rushed into Fordney’s cottage at Lakeview. ‘I knew you
were vacationing in the village, so, as soon as they escaped in their
car, I ran over here.’

‘Didn’t you call a doctor for the cashier?’

‘Too late. He must have died instantly.’

‘How do you know the bandits escaped in a car?’

‘I saw them from the window.’

‘Were you and the cashier alone at the time of the shooting?’

‘Yes. I had just made a deposit. I guess they got my money, too.’

Fordney walked over and picked up the overcoat his visitor had removed
upon entering the living-room.

‘You seem to have had a little accident. How did you get this?’ he
asked, examining a long tear in the front of the coat.

‘Why—I guess I tore it on the door when I rushed out of the bank. I
broke a button, too, you’ll notice.’

‘Let’s see your hat!’ demanded Fordney, eyeing his visitor sharply.

‘Why—where is it? I—must have left it in the bank!’

‘Well—let’s go. The police will be interested in your story—and bring
that coat with you!’


     Why did Fordney suspect this man of complicity in the hold-up?


                                   48
                               _Too Late_

‘Perhaps you’d better tell me exactly what happened,’ said Professor
Fordney kindly to the agitated man.

‘Well,’ continued Palmer, ‘Frank has been despondent and talked of
suicide for some time. I thought exercise and the open air would do him
good, so I suggested a vacation at my place in the country.

‘We’d been there three days, and he seemed in much better spirits. Then,
Thursday morning, after we’d been fishing an hour or so, he said he
thought he’d try another stream about a mile away. I was having good
luck, so I told him to go ahead and I’d meet him at the cabin later.

‘About eleven o’clock, when I’d caught my limit, I started back. As I
neared the cabin, I seemed to have a premonition of trouble, and ran the
last few yards. When I opened the door, God! I’ll never forget it! I’d
got there not more than five minutes behind him, and yet there he
lay—dead! That hideous look on his face! It haunts me! Why couldn’t I
have been just a few minutes earlier?

‘A whiskey bottle on the table and the glass which smelled of cyanide
told me the story. He’d done it, after all! I’ll never forgive myself,’
Palmer concluded with a sob.

‘Had you any visitors while at camp?’ asked Fordney.

‘No, we hadn’t seen anyone for two days.’

‘Did your friend smoke?’

‘Not at all.’

‘Was the door open or closed when you arrived?’

‘Why, closed.’

‘And the windows?’

‘Closed, too, Professor.’

‘If you’re innocent, Palmer, why are you lying?’ demanded Fordney.


                           What was the lie?


                                   49
                      _Sergeant Reynolds’s Theory_

‘Inspector Kelley picks out such nice messy jobs for me.’

Professor Fordney smiled as Reynolds made a wry face.

‘We found him lying against a boulder about ten feet from the bottom of
a fifty-foot embankment of solid rock. While there were no traces of the
path of his fall, the concrete road directly above him was stained with
blood. I don’t know why people insist on walking along the highway.

‘That’s such a bad curve right there. I don’t suppose we’ll ever find
out who struck him. And then, it’s possible for someone to have hit him
without knowing it. And I believe the car that did stopped and the
driver seeing how badly he was hurt, in fear, drove on.’

‘What makes you think that, Reynolds?’

‘There are tracks of a car skidding along the shoulder of the road, and
footprints in the blood where the fellow dropped on the pavement. I
suppose the poor old man regained consciousness, staggered to his feet,
and rolled down the embankment. That finished him. Ugh—it was a messy
affair!’

‘Who is he?’

‘We’re not sure. The only identification was a small scrap of paper in
his pocket with the name Tabor. By a queer coincidence there was a large
T deeply cut in the blood-stained boulder which stopped his fall.’

‘No doubt, Sergeant, the murderers intended you should take exactly the
inference you have, but don’t you see t____ w__ n_ b____ b______ t__
r___ a__ t__ b______?’


                 What did the Professor tell Reynolds?


                                   50
                           _Daylight Robbery_

‘I went to the office Thursday to do some work,’ Shaeffer related.

‘About noon, I happened to look out the window and notice a black sedan
draw up and two tough-looking fellows get out. They looked suspicious to
me, and, as I wasn’t armed, I hastily banged the safe door closed and
ran into the washroom—not a bit too soon either. In just a few seconds
they came in, one carrying a sawed-off shotgun. I could see them
plainly.

‘They looked around for a moment and one said, “If anybody comes in here
before we’re through, give it to him.”

‘He then went over to the safe and, after working on it for about five
minutes, had it open and took the money. They certainly had a lot of
nerve. Even stopped to count it! Then they leisurely strolled out the
door. I called Headquarters immediately.’

‘How much did they get?’ questioned Inspector Kelley.

‘Over fifteen thousand. We hadn’t banked the money from the day before
because Thursday was a holiday.’

‘Get the number of the car?’

‘No. When it drove up to the office, I didn’t see a license plate on the
front, and I couldn’t see the back. When I finished telephoning for the
police, it had gone.’

‘Was there anyone at the office besides you?’

‘I was alone. A man telephoned an hour before, however, and asked if we
were open. I told him no, but I’d be there until about two-thirty. He
hung up without answering.’


‘Well, fellows,’ asked Professor Fordney, of the members of his class in
   criminology, to whom he was telling the story, ‘why did Inspector
                  Kelley immediately arrest Shaeffer?’


                                   51
                          _A Simple Solution_

The sun streamed cheerfully through the window, bringing into lively
play the soft tones of the luxurious furnishings, as the two house
guests, Professor Fordney and Inspector Kelley, entered the oil
magnate’s bedroom.

‘Nothing in here to get excited about,’ said Kelley.

Fordney, opening the window and seeing Smith lying on the ground three
stories below it, cried, ‘Run downstairs, Inspector. Quick! There he
is!’

Kelley nodded, and was on his way. As he hurried out the door, he came
face to face with the butler. Fordney eyed the servant suspiciously as
he entered.

‘When did you see Mr. Smith last?’ he asked.

‘About an hour ago. He had a telephone call which seemed to excite him
and he came right up here to his room.’

‘Who brought this up?’ Fordney asked, fingering an unopened letter with
an illegible postmark.

‘He brought it up himself, sir, saying he was not to be disturbed.’

‘Anyone been here since?’

Kelley’s noisy entrance interrupted the butler’s ‘No, sir.’

‘Smith broke his neck. I found this on him,’ he remarked, handing the
Professor a note.

  Ill health and financial trouble have made life a burden. I’m leaving
  my bedroom for the last time. A three-story drop and my misery will be
  over.

                                                                   Smith

‘His suicide will be a blow to the oil industry,’ Kelley mused, as
Fordney sat down at the desk and began to write with Smith’s fountain
pen.

‘His _death_ will be, Inspector,’ said Fordney. ‘Better get the servants
together. This is murder—not suicide!’


       What reason did Fordney have for making such a statement?


                                   52
                                 _Who?_

‘I was trying to stop the flow with this, Professor,’ said Weeds, the
butler, indicating a blood-covered towel he had just removed from the
bed, ‘when Jones struck at me and I dropped it.’

‘And I’m sorry I missed!’ angrily exclaimed Jones, the colored
chauffeur.

‘Never mind that,’ said Inspector Kelley.

‘Did you find her, Weeds?’ asked Professor Fordney.

‘Yes, sir.’

‘She’s a good-looking mulatto,’ remarked Kelley, looking at the maid
lying on the floor at the side of the bed. Her right hand outstretched,
the wrist deeply cut, rested in a pool of blood on the polished floor.
‘Must have slipped off the bed.’

‘I don’t think so. The spread hasn’t a wrinkle in it,’ said Fordney,
noting the immaculate coverlet of pink lace, the edge caught under the
girl’s body.

‘She was almost gone when I found her,’ offered Weeds, ‘and she died
before I could get a doctor.’

‘Is this yours, Jones?’ inquired Fordney, picking up a sharp knife
hidden by the girl’s dress.

‘Yes. She wanted it to cut the stems of the flowers I had brought up.’

‘I didn’t see that knife when I tried to help her,’ said Weeds.

‘Course you didn’t! You put it there!’ shouted Jones angrily.

‘How do you know? You weren’t here. And what’s more, I heard you
threaten her last night. You don’t see any flowers here, do you,
Inspector?’ quietly asked Weeds.

‘You’re right,’ said Kelley. After whispering to Fordney, he continued,
‘Come on, _you’re_ under arrest. And _you_, we’ll question you later!’


                    Whom did Kelley arrest—and why?


                                   53
                         _Murder in the Swamp_

‘We’d better walk along the edge,’ said Professor Fordney, as they
started down the only path leading through the swamp.

‘I never thought of that. I was on the porch when Barton left,’ said
Bob, as he trudged along. ‘Ten minutes later, I heard a shot. I ran down
the path and found him about five hundred yards from the house, bleeding
terribly from a wound in the head. I dashed back for the first-aid kit
and bandaged him as best I could. He died shortly afterwards. Then I
returned and telephoned you.’

Reaching the body of Barton, he explained, ‘I turned him over so that I
could dress his head.’

‘He must have been shot from over there, because those three sets of
footprints are yours and the other one Barton’s,’ said Fordney, after a
careful examination. ‘Let’s look in that underbrush.’

Walking into it a few yards, he said, ‘Here’s where the murderer stood,
all right. See those powder-marks on the leaves?’

While removing the branch, Fordney cut his finger.

‘Better sterilize that, Professor.’

Back at the cottage, as he was about to pick up a mercurochrome bottle
from the kit Bob had used, he observed a spot of blood on the label.
Walking over to the basin, he saw Bob in the mirror above it, furtively
slip a pair of scissors into the kit.

Turning slowly around, he said, ‘I’ll have to hold you on suspicion of
murder.’


                                  Why?


                                   54
                          _Death by Drowning_

‘We were just getting into our boat,’ said the elder Carroll brother,
‘when we happened to notice Ridge out there in the middle of the river,
opposite Wolf’s old abandoned dock, acting very queerly. He jumped up
and down in the boat, and then, all of a sudden, grabbed an oar, threw
it up in the air, and jumped in.

‘We rowed to the spot, and I dived after him while my brother secured
his boat. The current’s fast there, but I’m a strong swimmer. I swam
around while my brother rowed about, but we could find no trace of him,’
he concluded.

‘We found the oar all right, in the weeds at Wolf’s dock,’ interjected
Riley, of the River Patrol.

‘How wide is the river at that point?’ asked Professor Fordney.

‘About half a mile,’ said Carroll.

‘Pretty lonely, too, isn’t it?’

‘It is that,’ replied Riley.

‘The coroner’s report says Ridge had received a blow of some kind on the
chin. Know anything about it, Carroll?’ inquired Fordney.

‘No, I don’t. Might have hit a rock or the side of the boat when he went
over.’

‘Were you up or down river, from Ridge?’

‘Up river, about three hundred yards, on the west side.’

‘Did you and your brother have on bathing-suits at the time?’

‘I did, but my brother didn’t.’

‘Are there any blood-stains in Ridge’s boat, Riley?’

‘Well, there are stains all right, and they look like blood to me.’

‘I’m not surprised. Hold them both.’


       Why was the Professor suspicious of the Carroll brothers?


                                   55
                      _Tragedy at the Convention_

The Convention was in an uproar! The Drys were making a determined stand
and showing some unexpected last-minute strength.

The Wets were shouting, clamoring, and stamping. The Chairman was vainly
trying to restore order amid a scene of wild confusion.

As the excitement reached its pitch, Hurlenson, a powerful leader of the
Wets, told a companion seated next to him that he felt a heart attack
coming on and was going back to the hotel.

An hour later, the Convention was stunned to learn he had committed
suicide in his room.

Professor Fordney, a guest at the Convention, went immediately to the
hotel.

In Hurlenson’s room he found the police, the doctor, and Pollert, an
influential delegate, who had discovered him.

‘The last time I saw Hurlenson was at the party last night, and he
seemed in excellent spirits,’ said Pollert. ‘I arose late this
morning—my room’s down at the other end of the corridor—and I was just
leaving for the Convention hall when I heard a shot. I dashed directly
here, but it was too late. He must have died immediately.’

‘He did,’ said the doctor. ‘He apparently stood in front of the mirror,
took aim, and blew out his brains. There are powder-burns all around the
wound.’

Learning that none of the maids or any of the other guests were on the
floor at the time, Fordney advised the police to hold Pollert on
suspicion of murder.


                                  Why?


                                   56
                         _A Murderer’s Mistake_

‘Look, Professor! That’s how the murderer got in, all right,’ said
Tracy.

As Fordney walked over to the ladder standing two feet from the back of
the house, he knelt down and carefully studied the heavy footprints
around it.

‘Whose room is that?’ he inquired, pointing to a second-story window
against which the top of the thirty-foot ladder rested.

‘That’s Uncle’s study,’ replied Tracy.

Going into the house, Fordney first questioned Withers, who had
discovered the body of Lane, Tracy’s uncle.

‘I was reading in my room,’ he said. ‘About two o’clock I heard a noise,
so I armed myself and crept out into the hall. Then I heard it again,
apparently in the study, so I stole down the corridor, opened the door,
and rushed in. I turned on the lights, ran over to the open window,
looked out, and saw a man scurry down the ladder, jump off, and run. I
fired twice, but evidently missed him,’ he concluded.

‘Were you home all evening, Mr. Tracy?’

‘No. I had just put up the car when I heard the shots and saw a figure
dash around the house.’

‘I’ll take a look at your car later, Tracy.

‘Withers, show me exactly how you found Lane before you lifted him to
the divan.’

As Withers righted an overturned chair, fitted its legs carefully to
four impressions in the rug at the right of a smoking-stand, sat down,
and slumped over to the left, Fordney said, ‘That’s enough. Which one of
you killed him?’


            Why did Fordney make this startling accusation?


                                   57
                          _Babe Comes Through_

‘Strike two!’ shouted Umpire Starlen.

‘Kill the Umpire! You big bum! Thief!’

Professor Fordney turned in his place directly behind the plate to look
at the excited man in the next box, waving an empty pop-bottle. He
smiled. Couldn’t blame a chap for getting excited. Starlen did seem to
be calling them wrong today. That last one _was_ wide!

What a ball game! Six to three in favor of Philadelphia, last half of
the ninth, three on, two out, and three and two on the mighty Babe. The
crowd was on its feet, yelling and stamping.

The excited pitcher delivered the next throw quickly. Just as Babe
connected with it for a home run a bottle hurtled through the air with
terrific force and caught Starlen on the back of the head. He went down
like a shot.

Pandemonium broke loose. Women screamed, and a panic was threatened.

‘That’s him! That’s him!’ shouted several people, as a policeman ran
down the ramp and grabbed the man who had attracted Fordney’s attention.

‘Tryin’ to get away, are you?’ bellowed the cop.

‘I didn’t do it! Let go of me!’ he cried, as the officer dragged him to
the office.

Fordney followed. ‘May I ask a few questions?’ he inquired.

‘Let’s see your score card, young man. H’m, why didn’t you record that
last hit? Everything else is here.’

‘Why, I was running at the time. I had an engagement.’

‘I see,’ said Fordney. ‘Officer, you have the wrong man. He didn’t do
it.’


                         How did Fordney know?


                                   58
                         _A Soldier of Fortune_

‘You’ll find Walter Briggs interesting, Fordney. He’s been all over the
world,’ said Attorney Hamilton over the telephone. ‘He’s turned up after
two years, claiming his uncle’s fortune. Better dine with us tonight.’

‘Thanks, I’ll be glad to. See you at eight.’

As the three men sat around the dinner-table, Fordney remarked: ‘You’re
a fortunate chap, Briggs. What have you been doing in the thirty-two
years you have been away from America?’

‘Well, lots of things. Mr. Hamilton, no doubt, told you I went to the
Congo with Father when I was three. When he died, I attended school in
England. Then I traveled for a while; did a bit of tiger-shooting in
Africa, killed elephants in India, and became an ivory-trader, roaming
over the Orient four or five years. I finally drifted into Russia, where
I was a technical advisor to the Soviet.’

‘What a jolly life you’ve had, Briggs!’

‘Not altogether, Professor. I was in Manchuria, where life was anything
but jolly. And then, being in sympathy with the Chinese, I took an
active part in the Sino-Japanese War. It was in China I learned of my
uncle’s death, so I came to New York immediately.’

‘Are you remaining here?’ asked Hamilton.

‘No. Me for Paris as soon as things are settled.’

After a pleasant evening, the three men parted. Reaching home, Fordney
hesitated about telephoning Hamilton. After all, it _was_ his duty to
advise him to check Briggs’s story carefully before turning over the
inheritance. As for him, he was frankly skeptical!


                             Are you? Why?


                                   59
                          _Number Twenty-Six_

‘You fellows _must_ remember that more often than otherwise the little,
seemingly inconsequential trifles, placed together, lead to the solution
of crime. Never take anything for granted; examine thoroughly what
appear to be the most unimportant details. You didn’t do so well with
your last lesson,’ said Professor Fordney, addressing his class. ‘Now
try your wits at this one.

‘“I know it sounds fishy, Inspector,”’ continued he, reading from a
paper, ‘“but I was walkin’ along Sixteenth Street mindin’ my business.
When I gets in front of number 26 I hears a dame scream ‘Help! Murder!’
so I dashed up the steps to the house, pushed open the door, and rushed
in. As I was halfway through the hall, a big guy steps out of a room and
says, ‘Ah, there, Mr. Farrell, just in time!’ I asks him what’s goin’
on, and just then three coppers came in and takes me, this guy, and a
woman, in. Neither one of them would talk to me on the way, so I don’t
know what it’s all about.”

‘“I’m going around myself,” replied the Inspector. “I’ll talk with you
when I get back.”

‘As Kelley turned the knob at number 26, the door was violently pushed
open in his face.

‘“Sorry,” said Detective Bradford. “Just going back to Headquarters.
Found plenty of dope all right. Here’s something you’ll be interested
in,” showing Kelley a man’s hat initialed “D.F.” “There are three
packets of cocaine under the sweatband.”

‘This story, of course, is fictitious,’ said Fordney, putting down the
paper, ‘but it illustrates my point. There’s just one, small,
unimportant detail that’s wrong. To repeat, you _must learn_ to detect
inconsistencies quickly, however insignificant. Quickly, now!’


                            Do _you_ get it?


In the next few anecdotes you will see the Professor at work and at
play, on cases both serious and amusing, involving pure deduction.

As in the preceding cases, however, every fact, with the clue necessary
to the solution, is given. There is only one right and logical answer to
each—to be deduced from the evidence presented.

Time yourself; see how long it takes _you_ to deduce the answer. And
then, after you have solved or missed them, try them on your friends.
They make a fascinating game—and there are lots of people who don’t play
bridge.


                                   60
                        _The Pullman Car Murder_

‘Tell your story to Professor Fordney,’ said the superintendent,
introducing the conductor.

‘Well,’ said Jackson, ‘last night just after we left Albany, lower eight
let out a terrifying shriek. I was standing at one end of the car, the
maid, porter, and brakeman at the other end. We met at the berth as
Briggs was gasping his last from a knife wound in the heart. I
immediately had both doors of the car guarded as well as the doors to
the washrooms. Every berth was occupied, and by this time the passengers
were milling around in the aisle.

‘I began to look for the missing knife with which Briggs had been
killed. Every passenger, even the maid, brakeman, and porter, every inch
of the car and all baggage, were searched, but still we failed to find
it.

‘The window-sills were covered with freshly fallen snow and an
examination proved that none of them had been opened. No one had left
the car and no one had entered either washroom. I knew the knife must be
in the car—but where?

‘Washington, our old Negro porter, really discovered the murderer’s
identity by “scrutinizin’ ’em all.”

‘I know your reputation, Professor, so you will probably have little
difficulty in determining how Washington located the assassin, but I’ll
bet you can’t tell me where I found the knife.’

Jackson’s face fell as Fordney quickly replied, ‘As there was only one
possible place it could have been, you found it....’


           How long did it take _you_ to discover the knife?


                                   61
                               _Forgery_

‘Can it be possible that this has happened to me!’ thought Everett
Taber, as he stood in the National Bank of New York ready to deposit his
fortune. Having completed his arrangements late the day before with the
bank’s executives, he was the first patron of the morning. Standing
alone in the bank’s commodious quarters, he regretted he had no one with
whom to share his happiness.

Suddenly, as he was making out his deposit slip, he decided to use his
own name, Everett Mead, instead of his stepfather’s name, by which he
had been known most of his life. It would be a simple matter to arrange
this with the officials later. As he blotted the deposit slip, Everett
Mead felt a new sense of poise and self-assurance take possession of
him. He gazed fondly at the name which proclaimed him a wealthy man. By
changing it he could completely sever former associations and start life
anew. What a wonderful day it was!

The cashier, impressed with the amount of the deposit, was very obliging
and wondered, as he thought of his own meager salary, how it would feel
to have so much money.

‘I see you are left-handed, Mr. Mead,’ he said, in an effort to appear
interested in such an important personage.

‘Yes,’ smilingly.

He left the bank without further conversation. Less than an hour later
his name had been forged to a check for five thousand dollars, despite
the fact that no one knew he had changed his name and no one had seen
him make out his deposit slip.


 Professor Fordney, acquainted with the facts, knew immediately how the
                 forgery had been accomplished. Do you?


                                   62
                      _The Christmas Eve Tragedy_

‘Professor Fordney,’ said Sheriff Brown, of Lake Dalton, ‘I came to New
York to ask your help in clearing up the murder of Horace Perkins at
Luckley Lodge.’

‘Sit down and tell me about it,’ invited Fordney.

‘The family chauffeur, returning from the station at ten o’clock on
Christmas Eve, found Perkins lying in a field, five yards off the Lodge
drive, with his skull bashed in.’

‘He telephoned me immediately and I instructed him to see that nothing
was disturbed. Arriving fifteen minutes later, I personally examined the
ground so no clues would be destroyed.

‘The _only_ footprints to be found were six of Perkins’s leading from
the drive to the spot where he lay. Around the body were a number of
deep impressions about two inches square. It had been snowing all day
until half an hour before the discovery of Perkins.

‘Leading away from the body and ending at the main road, two hundred
yards distant, were four lines of these same impressions, about three
and a half feet apart in length and about fourteen inches in width. In
some places, however, they were badly run together.

‘A stranger in our parts is quickly noted and investigation failed to
reveal a recent one. There were absolutely no other clues and I could
find no motive for the crime. It has me stumped, Professor,’ concluded
Brown.

‘Give me a little time,’ said Fordney. ‘Perhaps I can help. I’ll call
you at your hotel.’

An hour later, he said over the telephone, ‘Sheriff, look for a man
who.... Such a person only could possibly have committed the murder.’


                     What did Fordney say to Brown?


                                   63
                         _A Knight of the Bath_

‘You’ve heard me speak of my eccentric friend, Joe Leimert, haven’t you,
Professor?’ inquired Jud. ‘Great character! His costly new Los Angeles
penthouse is the despair of architects, but it reflects Joe, who cares
little for the opinions of others. Particularly in the matter of baths
is his independence reflected. While he has six of them, he is fondest
of the one leading off his own room.

‘It is a large all-tile bath twenty-four feet long, fifteen wide, and
seven high, without a single window. He went in to bathe a few days ago,
locked the door on the inside, as was his habit, and turned the cold
water full on. When he went to turn it off, he found to his dismay that
the mechanism controlling the drain and the taps was out of order. He
couldn’t let the water out and he couldn’t turn the tap off. Neither
could he unlock the door, and it was impossible to make himself heard.
What a predicament! There he was in a locked bath with no window,
couldn’t open or break down the door, couldn’t let the water out, or
turn it off, and he had no way of attracting attention.

‘Such a situation might have disturbed most people, but not Joe. He
leisurely proceeded with his bath and, when finished, nonchalantly
departed.’

‘My dear Jud,’ smiled the Professor, ‘your friend was indeed eccentric.
Of course, there was only one way out for him.’


                   This one’s easy, don’t you think?


                                   64
                      _Murder in the First Degree_

‘Well, Inspector, we have your man,’ said Fordney as he walked into the
office. ‘He gave us a merry chase, though.

‘What a cool one this murderer is! He calmly ate his dinner while
planning the crime. He didn’t give the cashier a chance—just brutally
shot him down in cold blood—and all for thirty dollars. I tell you,
Inspector, a man doesn’t need much incentive to commit murder these
days. After shooting the cashier, he made a fast get-away in a waiting
car.

‘Fortunately, there was a policeman having dinner in the restaurant at
the time, and he gave orders that nothing was to be disturbed at the
table where the suspected murderer had eaten.

‘There are several witnesses who will identify him, including the
waitress who served him, but no jury will convict on that alone.

‘While I found none of the suspect’s fingerprints, personal effects, or
physical traces at or on the table, I did find there a sure means of
conviction. I am positive he calmly premeditated this outrage while
eating his dinner.’

‘I hope you’re right, Professor,’ said Inspector Kelley, ‘but both he
and his attorney seem confident. They claim the gun was discharged
accidentally.’

‘They’ll never get away with that. The Prosecuting Attorney will be able
to prove that this man deliberately planned the crime while eating his
dinner. It’s murder in the first degree!’


         How did the Professor know the crime was premeditated?


                                   65
                       _A Rendezvous with Death_

‘One runs into unique conspiracies in my work,’ said Professor Fordney
over his after-dinner coffee. ‘Here is the clue to that Stone case you
are all interested in,’ he continued, passing the following newspaper
advertisement:

  WANTED. Competent private secretary. Unusual salary and opportunity
  for young man speaking Spanish. Culture and refinement necessary
  qualifications. Address KR 164.

‘I don’t see how that gave you a lead. Looks innocent enough to me,’
remarked one of the guests.

‘Well,’ said the Professor, ‘that ad furnished the strongest link in my
chain of evidence. I had information that Jack Carroll was infatuated
with Stone’s wife. At the suggestion of his wife, Stone answered this ad
and received a reply requesting him to call for a personal interview.
That interview was with death!

‘Mrs. Stone, when questioned, said she and her husband had not been on
particularly friendly terms recently and that the last she saw of him
was when he left for White Plains to see about the position.

‘I called at the newspaper office and was informed that the ad had been
inserted by Jonathan Gills, Pomeroy Hotel. They remembered it because
Mr. Gills had telephoned asking if there were any replies to his ad.
Despite the affirmative answer, they had never been called for. I found
Jonathan Gills was unknown at the Pomeroy Hotel.

‘I learned from Mrs. Stone that her husband had answered the ad in
long-hand and that he was left-handed and a very poor penman.

‘Pondering the matter, though puzzled at first, I finally hit upon the
manner in which Stone had been led to his death,’ concluded Fordney.


                    How do _you_ think it was done?


                                   66
                            _A Rum Regatta_

‘Here’s a story that should amuse you, Jean,’ said Professor Fordney to
his efficient and charming secretary.

He laughed heartily as he handed her a letter from his old friend,
George Collins, government investigator in Florida.

Jean read the following:

  An old sailor sitting on the sands of Nassau mending his fishing net
  was approached by three rum-runners shortly after the break of dawn.
  They came seeking his advice in connection with a wager they had made
  among themselves the night before.

  The three of them, having sampled too freely of the liquor they were
  to take the next day to Miami, had put up three thousand dollars as a
  prize for the owner of the last boat to reach Miami. The fact that
  their boss was in a hurry for the liquor had been completely
  forgotten.

  Sobered, they realized the ridiculousness of the wager but while
  anxious to reach Miami as quickly as possible, they all agreed it was
  not to be changed.

  The old sailor continued weaving the cords into his net with slow
  deliberation. In a few minutes, calling them to his side, he whispered
  exactly the same advice into the ear of each.

  A smile spread over his weather-beaten face and he chuckled as the
  three rum-runners raced to the boats and started for Miami at top
  speed.

‘It is amusing,’ laughed Jean, ‘but he forgot to say what the old sailor
whispered!’

‘That’s for you to figure out, young lady. I’ve never been a rum-runner,
but I’ve got the answer.’


       What advice did the old sailor whisper to the rum-runners?


                                   67
                           _Who is the Heir?_

‘As the Île de France slipped from her berth, Europe-bound, John Morgan,
the brother of New York’s largest theatrical producer, waved good-bye to
his family on the dock,’ said Professor Fordney.

‘Arriving in Paris a week later, he registered at the Hôtel Crillon. At
two o’clock next morning, he called the office and demanded he be given
another suite immediately, saying he didn’t like the view from his
present rooms. This, despite the fact that he had occupied—in fact,
insisted upon—this suite many times in the past.

‘Because of his prominence and wealth, he was accommodated at once.

‘Moving on to Berlin four days later, he registered at the Hotel Adlon.
The manager, anxious to please a brother of the internationally known
producer, greeted him personally. He afterward remarked how worried Mr.
Morgan appeared at the time.

‘At two o’clock in the morning a repetition of the Paris occurrence took
place.

‘From Berlin he went in turn to London, Copenhagen, Brussels, Vienna,
Bucharest, and Sofia, spending exactly four days in each place. He then
went to Teheran, Persia. He explained to the American Consul there that
he had come to Persia to sample at first hand the celebrated wines of
Shiraz, and also to continue his search for one Mirah Svari, a mystic he
had met in New York, and for whom he had sought vainly all over Europe.

‘On the fourth day in Teheran, he was found dead of an overdose of
hashish, in a squalid house in an unsavory quarter.

‘Receiving news of his death, his attorney in New York, acting on
previous instructions, opened his will, in which he had left his entire
fortune of five million dollars to the producer.

‘But, strange as it may seem, it was found John Morgan never had a
brother. What a situation!


 ‘Under the circumstances, and according to law, who received the huge
             fortune?’ smiled Fordney to his dinner guests.


                                   68
                    _The Professor Stops a Blunder_

At four o’clock Thursday afternoon, Louis Mundy unexpectedly received a
telegram requesting him to return home immediately, as his brother was
ill.

At eight that evening, he alighted from the plane in Washington. He had
not been in the city during the past two months. Hurrying to his
suburban home, he found his brother greatly improved. At ten o’clock he
set out on a hike through the country, returning at midnight.

These facts were all verified.

Between eleven and twelve o’clock that night, John Skidder was murdered,
and the only thing missing from his house was a note for ten thousand
dollars signed by Mundy.

Skidder’s secretary said the note was habitually kept at the office and
that she was very surprised when he took it home that evening.

Mundy declared he saw or passed no one on his hike, but under severe
questioning admitted having been near Skidder’s house shortly after
eleven o’clock.

A thorough investigation revealed that Skidder had no known enemies and
no one, other than Mundy, had the slightest reason for wishing him dead.

Mundy was consequently arrested. As he knew Skidder lived with only an
old man servant (who was out until after twelve that night), the police
believed he had gone unobserved to the house, demanded the note, and,
when refused, had murdered Skidder. No one but Mundy could possibly
profit by the disappearance of the note. As it was due in ten days and
he was in no position to meet it, they anticipated little difficulty in
obtaining a conviction due to the strong motive and weak alibi.

Asked his opinion, Professor Fordney surprisingly said he DIDN’T believe
any American jury would convict Mundy.


  He was right— Now, don’t argue! There’s only one answer. Don’t peek!
                             Figure it out.


                                   69
                          _The Perfect Crime_

Peter Johannes had one burning ambition—to commit a perfect crime. After
much thinking and careful planning, he chose burglary for his experiment
and a large brownstone mansion for the scene of his action.

Learning its occupants had left town, he arrayed himself in a business
suit of conservative cut, flung a light topcoat over his arm, picked up
a Gladstone bag, covered with foreign labels, and set out.

He had ascertained, of course, when the policeman patrolling that beat
was farthest away. At such a time he drove up in his swanky sport
roadster, swung jauntily to the sidewalk, skipped up the steps, and
fitted a skeleton key into the lock, which yielded easily. So far so
good, he thought.

Inside, he adjusted a black mask to his eyes and silk gloves to his
hands: the former for a bit of local color he couldn’t resist; the
latter for more practical purposes. What a jolly thing this burglaring
was!

He quickly filled his Gladstone with silver and other valuables.
Hurrying out, he removed his gloves after closing the door.

‘Done, and not a single clue left!’ he said to himself.

As he was about to descend the steps, he saw out of the corner of his
eye the policeman rounding the corner. Feigning disinterest, he quickly
pushed the bell-button and stood there whistling.

‘Hey, you!’ shouted the policeman, now standing at the bottom of the
steps. ‘What are you doin’ there? Them people ain’t home.’

‘Howdy, Officer. How goes it?’ said our hero blithely as he turned to
greet the bluecoat. ‘I know they’re not home; been trying to raise
someone for five minutes. Annoying, too, after running out to see them.
Oh, well,’ he continued, ‘I’ll be going along,’ as he unconcernedly
picked up his bag.

‘You bet you will—right to the hoosegow,’ bellowed the guardian of the
peace. ‘Your story I might have believed, but.... Come on, now, I’m
takin’ you down.’


   Alas for the perfect crime! ‘What caused our hero’s arrest?’ asked
                    Professor Fordney of his class.


                                   70
                    _The Professor Sees Through It_

‘Let’s go in to dinner—it’s twenty minutes after six, and I’m starved,’
said Hawkins.

‘Right!’ responded Professor Fordney, his train companion, ‘I’m hungry,
too.’

The two men had met only a few minutes before, as casually as travelers
do, but already seemed to find each other agreeable company.

At dinner Hawkins explained he was a conductor on another railroad and
bemoaned the loss of passenger traffic. Fordney, too, decried the
depression and its effects.

When the conductor came through, Hawkins tendered a pass with a friendly
remark, and Fordney, who said he had boarded the train in such a hurry
he didn’t have time to purchase a ticket, paid a cash fare. Neither he
nor the conductor having proper change, he borrowed fourteen cents from
Hawkins.

After an enjoyable dinner, they went back to the club car for a smoke
and continued their chat.

‘Ever been in Savannah, Mr. Hawkins?’ asked Fordney.

‘Why, yes. Several times. Why?’

‘Oh, nothing in particular. Charming city, isn’t it?’

‘Yes, it is, but I like the quaintness of New Orleans better, myself.’

And so they chatted through a pleasant evening until Hawkins, with a
yawn, said: ‘Well, it’s a quarter to eleven. Bedtime for me. See you in
the morning. Good-night, Professor. I’ve enjoyed knowing you.’

‘Good-night,’ responded Fordney. ‘I’ll give you the fourteen cents in
the morning. Don’t let the fact that I’m aware of your deception keep
you awake!’

‘What?’ cried the amazed Hawkins.


                         What did Fordney mean?


                                   71
                      _The Kidnapers’ Cleverness_

‘There are times,’ mused Professor Fordney from the depths of the most
comfortable chair in the lounge of the University Club, ‘when the
criminal does show ingenuity of a high order. I recall a most
interesting and baffling case on which I worked ten years ago.

‘A wealthy man whose daughter had been kidnaped had been warned that, if
he appealed to the police, she would be killed. Consequently, it was
difficult to get his coöperation in running down the criminals. However,
upon receiving the following note delivered in an express package 12″ ×
12″ × 12″ he sought my advice.

  Send us, by the means herein given you, $5,000 in cash, at exactly
  midnight tonight. If you do so, your daughter will be returned
  unharmed.

‘My client did as directed and his child was returned safely next day.

‘Do you know, Jim,’ asked Fordney of his fireside companion, ‘what means
the kidnapers employed that made trapping of them, or discovery of their
whereabouts, absolutely impossible? There’s a nice little problem in
deduction for a rising young attorney,’ he laughed.


   After ten minutes of deep silence on Jim’s part, he said, ‘I can’t
                figure it out, Professor. What was it?’




                               SOLUTIONS


                           1. _A Crack Shot_

It was a dark, starless, moonless night. The nearest habitation was five
miles. The eyes of no animal ever shine in the dark unless there is a
light by which they can be reflected, and a man’s eyes never shine under
any circumstances.

Therefore, Butler could not possibly have seen any eyes shining at him
in the dark. It was clearly murder.

  And thy deep eyes, amid the gloom,
  Shine like jewels in a shroud.
                                                             Longfellow.


                           2. _On the Scent_

Not even a prohibition agent would use alcohol in an automobile radiator
in or about Miami!

  The oil and wine of merry meeting.
                                                                 Irving.


                            3. _Fatal Error_

The Professor knew it would take a keener pair of eyes than Bronson’s to
see a nod in the dark.

The lights had not been turned on. Remember?

  Darkness visible.
                                                                 Milton.


                      4. _The Poison Murder Case_

Unless Bob Kewley had returned home after telling the Professor he was
going to the theater, he could not have known the library door was
locked. The fact that he did, coupled with the strong motive, naturally
directed suspicion to him. He inadvertently gave himself away.

  Error will slip through a crack, while truth will stick in a doorway.
                                                                   Shaw.


                       5. _A Strange ‘Kidnaping’_

Had Johnson wound his watch immediately before 2 A.M. Friday, the time
of his alleged kidnaping, it would not have been running Sunday
afternoon when he recovered consciousness and said he heard it ticking.

No standard-make watch will run sixty hours without winding.

  This act is an ancient tale new told;
  Being urged at a time unseasonable.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                        6. _A Valuable Formula_

In a small room the intruder would _unquestionably_ have heard Hyde
dialing Headquarters, and therefore could not have been unaware of his
presence.

As Hyde had obviously lied about this, Fordney was convinced he had
fabricated the entire story in order to sell the formula twice.

  Don’t tell me of deception; a lie is a lie, whether it be a lie to the
  eye or a lie to the ear.
                                                            Dr. Johnson.


                             7. _Strangled_

There had been a dry, hot spell at that place for twenty-two days. Irene
Greer’s hair was matted with mud; therefore, she must have been attacked
elsewhere.

  The face of things appeareth not the same far off and when we see them
  right at hand.
                                                              Euripides.


                        8. _Death in the Office_

Gifford could not have been shot at the time he called Fordney, as he
was found with a bullet through his heart. The Professor’s theory was
that Gifford wanted his death to appear as murder in order to protect
his heavy insurance.

  The heart does not lie.
                                                                Alfieri.


                   9. _They Usually Forget Something_

The note, although misspelled, poorly expressed, and written by a
seemingly illiterate hand, was punctuated properly, in two places. A
semicolon and a comma would not have been used had the writer been an
uneducated man.

Force of habit had betrayed him!

  You write with ease to show your breeding,
  But easy writing’s curst hard reading.
                                                               Sheridan.


                   10. _The Professor Gives a Lesson_

Cardoni said he saw the kidnapers around a table as he peered through
the keyhole. Yale locks do not have keyholes.

Kelley was justified in throwing him out, don’t you think? The class
found this an easy one—did you?

  Since your eyes are so sharpe that you cannot onely looke through a
  milstone, but cleane through the minde.
                                                                   Lyly.


                        11. _Upstairs and Down_

The policeman ran through the hall and unlocked the kitchen door.

The doors to the porch and cellar were locked on the inside. Had the old
lady committed suicide, she could not have locked the door leading to
the hall from the outside.

The murderer, in leaving, locked this door and forgot to remove the key.
The inevitable slip!

  A blockhead cannot come in, nor go away, like a man of sense.
                                                                Bruyère.


                            12. _Class Day_

The student readily recognized the absurdity of the Professor’s story
which he had given to his class to test their quick detection of a
glaring inconsistency. If it must be explained, an orchestra under
personal leadership does not play during the showing of a ‘talkie.’
Right?

  Wit marries ideas lying far apart, by a sudden jerk of the
  understanding.
                                                                Whipple.


                          13. _A Hot Pursuit_

Smith said he _ran_ after the burglar. Had he done so he could not have
known the cellar window had been chiseled open. Therefore, his story was
obviously faked.

  A lie never lives to be old.
                                                              Sophocles.


                      14. _A Question of Identity_

As Diana Lane was walking down the corridor with her back to Nora, it
was impossible for the servant to know Diana was wearing her famous
emerald pendant.

  There is an alchemy of quiet malice by which women can concoct a
  subtle poison from ordinary trifles.
                                                              Hawthorne.


                       15. _A Yachtsman’s Alibi_

As Picus said there was no breeze, the distress flag would have hung
limp against the mast, and the Captain could not have seen, at that
distance, whether or not the flag was upside down.

That’s all the Professor needed to determine the falsity of his alibi.
However, Picus was a poor sailor. While the International Distress
Signal is a flag flown upside down, it is by custom and regulation
always flown at half-mast.

  ... And the sea charm’d into a calm so still
  That not a wrinkle ruffles her smooth face.
                                                                 Dryden.


                      16. _Murder at Coney Island_

Jasper said he found the woman sitting _up_ in the _middle_ of the
chariot. The motion of the merry-go-round would have made it impossible
for a dead body to remain upright in the middle of the chariot.

  Sir, you are giving a reason for it; but that will not make it
  right....
                                                                Johnson.


                            17. _Too Clever_

The murderer tried to give the impression that Dawson had died before
finishing the incriminating note. Had he written it and died before
completing it, he could not have put the pen back in the tray where it
was found.

In his effort to incriminate Lynch, the murderer had been too cautious.
A costly oversight.

  Man’s caution often into danger turns,
  And his guard falling crushes him to death.
                                                                  Young.


                          18. _Bloody Murder_

The Professor knew it was not suicide, because Thompson’s coat, which
was flung _across_ the room, was blood-stained. Quite impossible if he
had taken his own life.

  Blood, though it sleep a time, yet never dies.
                                                                Chapman.


                         19. _Death Back-Stage_

There were _no_ finger-prints on the gun which killed Claudia Mason. She
could not have shot herself in the temple and then wiped off the
revolver.

The murderer neglected to get her fingerprints on the gun.

  A fool cannot be an actor, though an actor may act a fool’s part.
                                                              Sophocles.


                       20. _An Easy Combination_

It would have been impossible for Fellows to have hastily dialed a
number in the _dark_. Try it!

  Haste trips up its own heels, fetters and stops itself.
                                                                 Seneca.


                         21. _A Modern Knight_

The fact that the bullet was found in the body and the only trace of its
firing was the hole in the curtain _below_ the window-sill proved
conclusively the shot could not have been fired from within the room.

Rocca entered at the moment his sister shot Chase from outside. Grabbing
the gun from her hand, he chivalrously protected her.

  But, friend, the thing is clear—speaks for itself.
                                                           Aristophanes.


                        22. _The Jewel Robbery_

The butler said that, as he called for help, Dudley, a stranger, rushed
in.

Owings had locked up before leaving and, therefore, Dudley could not
have rushed in through a locked door. The robbery was obviously framed
by Stuben and Dudley.

  Absurdities die of self-strangulation.
                                                             Haliburton.


                   23. _Before the Coroner’s Inquest_

Curry could not possibly have ‘looked up’ while rowing _upstream_ and
seen the action he described which took place fifty yards _behind_ him.

  The eyes of other people are the eyes that ruin us.
                                                               Franklin.


                     24. _The Fifth Avenue Hold-Up_

Baldwin said, ‘Mr. Cross tried to call my attention to it [safe] with a
jerk of his thumb’ at a time when Cross was unconscious. Obviously
impossible. Baldwin was lying, which there was no reason for doing had
he been innocent.

  When all sins are old in us, and go upon crutches.
  Covetousness does but then lie in her cradle.
                                                                 Decker.


                       25. _Behind Locked Doors_

Kingston thought his boldness in calling attention to his own footprints
in the carpet would distract Fordney’s attention from their
significance.

The room had been locked for three months. Of the three men, only
Watkins rushed into the room; Fordney and Kingston halting over the
threshold. Therefore, the fact that Kingston’s footprints were found
near the chair in which his uncle sat dead pointed directly to him as
the murderer.

  Cunning differs from wisdom
  As twilight from open day.
                                                            Dr. Johnson.


                           26. _Lost at Sea_

It would have been impossible for Mrs. Rollins to have seen a man pick
up from the deck the bag of diamonds. On a dark, moonless night at sea
one literally cannot see his hand before his face.

  The repose of darkness is deeper on the water than on the land.
                                                            Victor Hugo.


                          27. _A Suave Gunman_

Taylor said the bandit wore a silver belt-buckle. This he could not have
seen, for he stated: ‘As the robber passed through the door, he
unbuttoned his coat and slipped the revolver in his back pocket.’

It would have been impossible for Taylor to have seen the man’s
belt-buckle when his coat was buttoned.

As this statement was false, the rest of his account was disregarded by
the Professor.

  He draweth out the thread of his verbosity
  Finer than the staple of his argument.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                         28. _Accidental Death_

Had the man’s injuries been caused only by being thrown through the
windshield, there would have been no blood on the front seat of the car.
Therefore, the Professor knew the blood on the seat had been caused by
injuries to the man, with probable murderous intent, before he was
thrown through the windshield.

His assailant had killed him, started the car, and had then hopped off
the running-board, hoping the wreckage would cover the murder.

  Forethought we may have, undoubtedly, but not foresight.
                                                               Napoleon.


                            29. _Easy Money_

Wilkins said he saw the burglar pick up a stack of ten- and
twenty-dollar bills from the table in the center of the large library.

Had he not been guilty, he could not have known what the denominations
of the bills were. It would have been impossible to have determined this
from the doorway.

An unconscious slip on his part.

If you are doubtful, just try to determine the denomination of a stack
of bills on a table in the center of a large room, from the doorway.

  For any man with half an eye,
  What stands before him may espy;
  But optics sharp it needs I ween,
  To see what is not to be seen.
                                                          John Trumbull.


                       30. _Robbery at High Noon_

He was suspicious of John, the nephew, of course. Upon being asked where
he was at the time of the robbery, he stated he was ‘hauling in a
muskie.’

Unless he had guilty knowledge, he could not possibly have known at what
time the robbery was committed.

He fell neatly into the Professor’s trap, don’t you think?

  Let guilty men remember, their black deeds
  Do lean on crutches made of slender reeds.
                                                           John Webster.


                      31. _The Wrong Foot Forward_

Paslovsky, the witness, who could not understand or speak enough English
to make a simple statement to the court, yet knew _exactly_ what the
conductor yelled to the motorman.

This was so patently impossible that the Judge was entirely justified in
dismissing the suit.

  Liars are verbal forgers.
                                                              Chatfield.


                     32. _Death Attends the Party_

Had Dawes fallen on the table after being shot, the jar would have
knocked over the ‘crazily balanced glasses.’ As the Professor found the
glasses on the table, _balanced_, it was obvious Dawes had been shot,
then carefully placed at the table to give the appearance of suicide. A
bad slip!

  There is nothing insignificant, nothing!
                                                              Coleridge.


                            33. _No Way Out_

The note was written with _pencil_, yet there was no pencil found in the
room. Apparently the murderer wrote the note to resemble the dead man’s
handwriting and through force of habit put it in his pocket.

  Men are men; the best sometimes forget.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                         34. _Midnight Murder_

Day said he got the blood on his muffler when he bent over Quale’s body.
As blood coagulates and dries in a short time, it would have been
impossible for him to have stained his muffler unless it had touched the
blood of Quale shortly after his death. Therefore, Fordney knew he must
have been with Quale soon after he was stabbed.

  Murder, though it have no tongue,
  Will speak with most miraculous organ.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                        35. _Speakeasy Stick-Up_

Sullivan, the bartender, said that, as he worked the combination to open
the wall safe, he _heard_ the hold-up man _behind him_. As he was not
permitted to move, he could not have known the gunman was a _big,
tough-looking mug_, as he described him.

As there would be no other motive in telling this impossible story, the
hold-up was faked.

  Inspiring, bold John Barleycorn,
  What dangers thou canst make us scorn.
                                                                  Burns.


                           36. _Behind Time_

The engineer said he had not seen Nelson until he was practically on top
of him. That, of course, is impossible. An engineer of a train running
on a straight-away can see nothing as close as ten yards in front of
him.

  You cram these words into mine ears,
  Against the stomach of my sense.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                       37. _A Broken Engagement_

Molly said she had retired at ten, after locking her door, and had not
awakened until Fordney had aroused her.

Yet a few minutes after Dot had been murdered, the Professor idly
‘shaped the wax’ of the candle on her desk. This would have been
impossible had not the candle been burning within a few minutes before
he entered.

Her insistence that she had been asleep, together with the strong
motive, convinced Fordney she was involved, as was later proved.

  Love can make us fiends as well as angels.
                                                       Charles Kingsley.


                      38. _The Holden Road Murder_

Had the butler dashed in the front door as he said he did, there would
have been foot-tracks in the vestibule.

Remember, the Professor ‘splashed his way through the mud and rain, to
the _door_ of 27 Holden Road,’ and found the vestibule spotless.
Therefore, Wilkins was lying, and as Cannon corroborated his story, he
was also necessarily involved.

  Nay, her foot speaks.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                         39. _Fishermen’s Luck_

Holmes could not have seen the bag on the bottom of the lake during a
cloudburst. The agitation of even crystal clear water under such
conditions would have so disturbed the surface that an object on the
bottom could not be seen.

  A man so lucky is rarer than a white crow.
                                                                Juvenal.


                       40. _The Unlucky Elephant_

Holman was lying face down with his topcoat buttoned; therefore, if his
watch crystal had been broken by his fall, none of the glass could have
been found on the floor.

  For never, never wicked man was wise.
                                                                  Homer.


                      41. _The Professor Listens_

The notice of the bank failure, appearing in the _Jacksonville Herald_,
was dated July 5th. This could not have reached Delavin at a remote part
of Cuba, unserviced by planes, in time for him to get back to New York
on the 6th.

His alibi, therefore, was completely broken, as he said the newspaper
clipping brought him back.

  Time is the herald of truth.
                                                                 Cicero.


                           42. _Ten-Fifteen_

The secretary said he heard Waters talking to Fordney over the
telephone. As Fordney’s name was not mentioned during the conversation,
the secretary could not have known to whom Waters was talking.

It’s the little things that count—in crime detection.

  Take care lest your tongue cut off your head.
                                                                Persian.


                          43. _Rapid Transit_

The driver could not possibly have seen from the front seat anyone
standing on the tail-gate of the big van.

  If common sense has not the brilliancy of the sun, it has the fixity
  of the stars.
                                                       Fernan Caballero.


                  44. _The Professor is Disappointed_

Fordney pointed to the raindrops glistening on a leaf in the shoe
impression.

According to Vi Cargo’s statement, the burglar had jumped from her
window after it had stopped raining.

  The shameless have a brow of brass.
                                                          Hindu Proverb.


                        45. _A Dramatic Triumph_

Sibyl Mortimer said Boswell had telephoned her shortly after nine. As he
was on the stage continuously for forty-five minutes after the curtain
rose, he could not have telephoned her.

Obviously she had some reason for stating he did. Fordney was quick to
detect the flaw in her alibi.

  It is not wise to be wiser than is necessary.
                                                               Quinault.


                        46. _Murder at the Lake_

A strong east wind blew _off_ the lake; therefore, regardless of the
direction in which he was walking, Rice’s hat could not possibly have
blown into the lake.

The Professor was naturally suspicious of him when he told such a
ridiculous lie.

  Is’t possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
                                                            Shakespeare.


                   47. _The Professor Studies a Coat_

As the man had removed his overcoat on entering the Professor’s
living-room, it was perfectly patent he had not been handcuffed.

He said he ran over to Fordney’s immediately after the bandits left.

  Truth has not such an urgent air.
                                                                Boileau.


                             48. _Too Late_

Fordney doubted Palmer’s innocence because of his statement, ‘I’d got
there not more than five minutes behind him.’

There was, of course, no way he could have determined when Frank had
arrived at the cabin.

  In general, treachery, though at first sufficiently cautious, yet in
  the end betrays itself.
                                                                   Livy.


                    49. _Sergeant Reynolds’s Theory_

The Professor told Reynolds, ‘There was no blood between the road and
the boulder.’

Had the man _rolled_ down the embankment, there would have been some
blood on the rocks along the path his body took.

  How hast thou purchased this experience?
    By my penny of observation.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                         50. _Daylight Robbery_

As no safe locks unless the combination is turned, Shaeffer’s story of
_banging_ it closed and then the robbers working on it five minutes was
ridiculous!

  He cometh unto you with a tale which holdeth children from play, and
  old men from the chimney corner.
                                                      Sir Philip Sidney.


                        51. _A Simple Solution_

Had Smith committed suicide, the window through which he jumped would
not have been closed as Fordney found it.

  Every crime has, in the moment of its perpetration, its own avenging
  angel.
                                                              Coleridge.


                               52. _Who?_

Kelley arrested Weeds, the butler. He said he dropped on the bed the
blood-covered towel with which he was trying to arrest the flow from the
maid’s wrist as Jones struck at him.

Yet Kelley and Fordney found the bed coverlet _immaculate_. Had Weeds
done as he said, there would have been blood-stains on the bedcover.

  Blood follows blood.
                                                                  Defoe.


                       53. _Murder in the Swamp_

The three sets of Bob’s footprints in the path told Fordney the story.
Had Bob been at the house when his friend was shot, as he contended,
there would have been _four_ sets of his footprints.

  That is to be wise to see that which lies before your feet.
                                                                Terence.


                        54. _Death by Drowning_

Had the accident occurred as explained by Carroll, the oar of Ridge’s
boat could not have been found, as it was, at the dock _opposite_ the
point where he jumped in. The current would have deposited it
downstream. Therefore, the Professor recommended the detention of the
brothers.

  More water glideth by the mill, than wots the miller of.
                                                            Shakespeare.


                    55. _Tragedy at the Convention_

Fordney suspected Pollert because of his own statements that he did not
know Hurlenson had returned to the hotel. Yet, when he said he heard a
shot, he ran _directly_ to Hurlenson’s room.

As his own room was down the corridor, he could not have known from what
room the shot came, and he had no reason to assume it came from
Hurlenson’s room.

  Politics, as a trade, finds most and leaves nearly all dishonest.
                                                        Abraham Lincoln.


                       56. _A Murderer’s Mistake_

These murderers, like many others, betrayed themselves by a simple
oversight. One look at the ladder and Fordney knew no man could have
climbed up or down it. The thirty-foot ladder was placed _two_ feet from
the house. Any person ascending or descending the ladder in such a
position would have fallen backwards before reaching the top or bottom.

  To all facts there are laws,
  The effect has its cause,
  And I mount to the cause.
                                                            Lord Lytton.


                        57. _Babe Comes Through_

There is a screen on the grandstand behind the home plate.

Fordney had noticed a few seconds before, in the box next to him, the
man whom the policeman had caught running down the ramp. As he could not
have thrown a bottle through the screen, and, in the time at his
disposal, could not have reached either side of the screen, Fordney knew
he was innocent.

He had noticed the man _after_ two strikes and three balls had been
called, and the pitcher delivered the next ball quickly.

  We must have bloody noses and crack’d crowns,
  God’s me, my horse!
                                                            Shakespeare.


                       58. _A Soldier of Fortune_

Hamilton knew the real Walter Briggs had gone to Africa as a child. So,
when this chap said he had shot tigers in Africa, Fordney was very, very
skeptical. There are no tigers in Africa. Oh, well—look it up yourself!

  A traveler without observation is a bird without wings.
                                                                  Saadi.


                        59. _Number Twenty-Six_

The inconsistency is this: Farrell said he _pushed_ open the door. Yet
Bradford, _inside_ the house, _pushed_ the door in Kelley’s face as the
Inspector was entering.

If Bradford _pushed_ the door in Kelley’s face, Farrell must have
_pulled_ the door to open it.

  The smallest hair throws its shadow.
                                                                 Goethe.


                      60. _The Pullman Car Murder_

Every piece of baggage had been examined and every inch of the car
inspected. All passengers, even the maid, porter, and brakeman, had been
searched. The knife was still in the car.

Remember?—there was nothing said about the conductor being searched. The
knife was found in his pocket.

  He was in logic a great crytic,
  Profoundly skilled in analytic;
  He could distinguish and divide
  A hair twixt south and south-west side.
                                                                 Butler.


                             61. _Forgery_

The forged signature was copied from the blotter which Mead had used.

  Thou strong seducer, opportunity.
                                                                 Dryden.


                    62. _The Christmas Eve Tragedy_

The Professor said to Brown, ‘Sheriff, look for a man in your community
who is skilled or adept in the use of _stilts_. Only a man on stilts
could have made the marks in the snow you described.’

P.S. The Professor was right.

  Be the first to say what is self-evident,
  And you are immortal.
                                                       Ebner-Eschenbach.


                       63. _A Knight of the Bath_

You recall that Leimert was eccentric. No mention of bath _room_ was
made. Leimert’s bath had no top, so he climbed out!

Silly, what?

  If anything is spoken in jest, it is not fair to turn it to earnest.
                                                                Plautus.


                    64. _Murder in the First Degree_

The fact that _none_ of the suspect’s fingerprints were on the dishes or
silver used while eating convicted him of first-degree murder.

In wiping his _own_ prints from the things he had handled, he destroyed
_all_ prints—those of the waitress, cook, etc.

A damning bit of evidence that proved premeditation.

  The weakest spot in every man is when he thinks himself to be the
  wisest.
                                                                 Emmons.


                     65. _A Rendezvous with Death_

No one called at the _Times_ for the answers to the advertisement, yet
Stone received a reply to his letter of application. The ad was inserted
by Carroll under the fictitious name of Jonathan Gills and answered by
Stone at his wife’s suggestion. She acquainted her lover, Carroll, with
this fact, and he wrote Stone, arranging the meeting at which he
disappeared.

  When any great design thou dost intend,
  Think on the means, the manner, and the end.
                                                                 Denham.


                          66. _A Rum Regatta_

The old sailor whispered to each, ‘Run the other man’s boat.’ As the
owner of the _last_ boat to reach Miami was to get the money, each one
raced the boat he was driving. By doing so, he hoped to beat his own
boat, which was being driven by one of the others.

  Lookers-on many times see more than gamesters.
                                                                  Bacon.


                         67. _Who is the Heir?_

John Morgan’s _sister_, of course!

  Let us consider the reason of the case. For nothing is law that is not
  reason.
                                                                 Powell.


                  68. _The Professor Stops a Blunder_

Mundy had been unexpectedly called to Washington. Skidder’s secretary
said the note was habitually kept at the office. Mundy, therefore, could
not possibly have known of Skidder’s intention of taking it home. That
was exactly the weakness in the case of the police. Despite the damning
circumstantial evidence, motive could not be proved unless it could be
shown that Mundy knew the note would be at Skidder’s house.

  How little do they see what is, who frame
  Their hasty judgments upon that which seems.
                                                                Southey.


                        69. _The Perfect Crime_

Alas! Peter Johannes had forgotten to remove his mask on leaving the
house!

  Whoever thinks a perfect work to see,
  Thinks what ne’er was, nor is, nor e’er shall be.
                                                                   Pope.


                  70. _The Professor Sees Through It_

When Hawkins said, ‘it’s twenty minutes after six’ and ‘it’s a quarter
to eleven,’ Fordney knew he was not a railroad man.

No railroad worker _ever_ speaks of the time in any other manner than,
‘it’s six-twenty’ and ‘it’s ten-forty-five.’

_Ask the next conductor!_

  There is nothing more nearly permanent in human life than a
  well-established custom.
                                                        Joseph Anderson.


                    71. _The Kidnapers’ Cleverness_

The express package contained a carrier pigeon.

  A bird of the air shall carry, and that which hath wings shall tell
  the matter.
                                                           Ecclesiastes.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--In the text versions, delimited italicized text by _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Minute Mysteries, by Harold Austin Ripley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINUTE MYSTERIES ***

***** This file should be named 50603-0.txt or 50603-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/6/0/50603/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

