The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Haunted House, by Walter Hubbell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Haunted House
       A True Ghost Story


Author: Walter Hubbell



Release Date: October 31, 2005  [eBook #16975]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAUNTED HOUSE***


E-text prepared by Thierry Alberto and the Ghosts and Goblins of the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/)



THE HAUNTED HOUSE:

A True Ghost Story.

Being an account of the Mysterious Manifestations that have taken
place in the presence of

ESTHER COX,

The young Girl who is possessed of Devils, and has become known
throughout the entire Dominion as

THE GREAT AMHERST MYSTERY,

by

WALTER HUBBELL.




       *       *       *       *       *



THE AUTHOR LIVED IN THE HOUSE AND WITNESSED THE WONDERFUL
MANIFESTATIONS.


       *       *       *       *       *



Saint John, N.B.:
"Daily News" Steam Publishing Office, Canterbury Street.

1879.





INTRODUCTION.


The manifestations described in this story commenced one year ago. No
person has yet been able to ascertain their cause. Scientific men from
all parts of Canada and the United States have investigated them in
vain. Some people think that electricity is the principal agent; others,
mesmerism; whilst others again, are sure they are produced by the devil.
Of the three supposed causes, the latter is certainly the most plausible
theory, for some of the manifestations are remarkably devilish in their
appearance and effect. For instance, the mysterious setting of fires,
the powerful shaking of the house, the loud and incessant noises and
distinct knocking, as if made by invisible sledge-hammers, on the walls;
also, the strange actions of the household furniture, which moves about
in the broad daylight without the slightest visible cause.

As these strange things only occur while Miss Esther Cox is present, she
has become known as the "Amherst Mystery" throughout the entire country.

The author of this work lived for six weeks in the haunted house, and
considers it his duty to place the entire matter before the public in
its true light, having been requested to do so by the family of Miss
Cox.




THE HAUNTED HOUSE.




CHAPTER I.

THE HOME OF ESTHER COX.


Amherst, Nova Scotia, is a beautiful little village on the famous Bay of
Fundy; has a population of about three thousand souls, and contains four
churches, an academy, a music hall, a large iron foundry, a large shoe
factory, and more stores of various kinds than any village of its size
in the Province.

The private residences of the more wealthy inhabitants are very
picturesque in their appearance, being surrounded by beautifully laid
out lawns, containing ornamental trees of various kinds and numerous
beds of flowers of choice and sometimes very rare varieties.

The residences of Parson Townsend, Mr. Robb, Doctor Nathan Tupper, and
Mr. G.G. Bird, proprietor of the Amherst book store; also that of Mr.
Amos Purdy, the village Post Master, and others too numerous to mention,
are sure to attract the visitor's attention and command his admiration.

On Princess street, near Church, there stands a neat two story cottage,
painted yellow. It has in front a small yard, which extends back to the
stable. The tidy appearance of the cottage and its pleasant situation
are sure to attract a stranger's attention. Upon entering the house
everything is found to be so tastefully arranged, so scrupulously clean,
and so comfortable, that the visitor feels at home in a moment, being
confident that everything is looked after by a thrifty housewife.

The first floor consists of four rooms, a parlor containing a large bay
window, filled with beautiful geraniums of every imaginable color and
variety, is the first to attract attention; then the dining room, with
its old fashioned clock, its numerous home made rugs, easy chairs, and
commodious table, makes one feel like dining, especially if the hour is
near twelve; for about that time of day savory odors are sure to issue
from the adjoining kitchen. The kitchen is all that a room of the kind
in a village cottage should be, is not very large, and contains an
ordinary wood stove, a large pine table, and a small washstand, has a
door opening into the side yard near the stable, and another into the
wash shed, besides the one connecting it with the dining room, making
three doors in all, and one window. The fourth room is very small, and
is used as a sewing room; it adjoins the dining room, and the parlor,
and has a door opening into each. Besides the four rooms on the first
floor, there is a large pantry, having a small window about four feet
from the floor, the door of this pantry opens into the dining room. Such
is the arrangement of the first floor.

Upon ascending a short flight of stairs, and turning to the left, you
find yourself in the second story of the cottage, which consists of an
entry and four small bed rooms, all opening into the entry. Each one of
the rooms has one window, and only one door. Two of these little bed
rooms face towards the street, and the other two towards the back of the
cottage. They, like the rest of the house, are conspicuous for their
neat, cosy aspect, being papered and painted, and furnished with
ordinary cottage furniture. In fact everything about the little cottage
will impress a casual observer with the fact that its inmates are happy,
and evidently at peace with God and man.

This humble cottage is the home of Daniel Teed, shoemaker. Everybody
knows and respects honest hard working Dan, who never owes a dollar if
he can help it, and never allows his family to want for any comfort that
can be procured, with his hard earned salary as foreman of the Amherst
Shoe Factory.

Dan's family consists of his wife Olive, as good a soul as ever lived,
always hard at work. From early morning until dusky eve she is on her
feet. It has always been a matter of gossip and astonishment, among the
neighbors, as to how little Mrs. Teed, for she is by no means what you
would call a large woman, could work so incessantly without becoming
weary and resting for an hour or so after dinner. But she works on all
the same, never rests, and they still look on her with astonishment. Dan
and Olive have two little boys. Willie, the eldest, is _five_ years old;
he is a strong, healthy looking lad, with a ruddy complexion, blue eyes,
and brown curly hair; his principal amusements are throwing stones,
chasing the chickens, and hurting his little brother. George, the
youngest of Dan's boys, is the finest boy of his age in the village and
is only a little over a year old; his merry little laugh, winning ways,
and cunning actions to attract attention have made him a favorite with
all who visit at the cottage.

Besides his wife and two little boys, Dan has under his honest roof and
protection his wife's two sisters,--Jane and Esther Cox--who board with
him. Jane is a lady-like, self-possessed young woman of about
twenty-two, and is quite a beauty; her hair is very light brown and
reaches below her waist when she allows it to fall in graceful
tresses--at other times she wears it in the Grecian style; her eyes are
of a greyish hue; a clear complexion and handsome teeth add to her fine
appearance. In fact, Jane Cox is one of the village belles, and has
hosts of admirers, not of the male sex alone, for she is also popular
among the ladies; she is a member and regular attendant of Parson
Townsend's Church, which, by the way, the good Parson has had under his
care for about forty-five years. Esther Cox, Dan's other sister in-law,
is such a remarkable girl in every respect that I must give as complete
a description of her as possible. She was born in Upper Stewiacke, Nova
Scotia, on March 28th, 1860, and is consequently in her eighteenth year.
Esther has always been a queer girl. When born she was so small that her
good, kind grandmother, who raised her, (her mother having died when she
was three weeks old) had to wash and dress her on a pillow, and in fact
keep her on it all the time until she was nine months old, at which age
her weight was only five pounds. When she was quite a little girl her
father, Archibald T. Cox, married again, and moved to East Machias,
Maine, where he has since resided. Having followed his second wife to
the grave, he married a third with whom he is now living. Esther's early
years having been spent with her grandmother, she very naturally became
grave and old-fashioned, without knowing how or why. Like all little
girls, she was remarkably susceptible to surrounding influences, and the
sedate manner and actions of the old lady made an early impression on
Esther that will cling to her through life.

In person Esther is of low stature and rather inclined to be stout; her
hair is curly, of a dark brown color, and is now short, reaching only to
her shoulders; her eyes are large and grey, with a bluish tinge, and an
earnest expression which seems to say, "why do you stare at me so; I can
not help it if I am not like other people." Her eye-brows and eye-lashes
are dark and well marked, that is to say, the lashes are long and the
eye-brows very distinct. Her face is what can be called round, with well
shaped features; she has remarkably handsome teeth, and a pale
complexion. Her hands and feet are small and well shaped, and although
inclined to be stout, she is fond of work, and is a great help to her
sister Olive, although she sometimes requires a little urging.

Although Esther is not possessed of the beauty that Jane is famous for,
still there is something earnest, honest and attractive about this
simple-hearted village maiden, that wins for her lots of friends of
about her own age; in fact, she is quite in demand among the little
children of the neighborhood also, who are ever ready to have a romp and
a game with _Ester_, as they all call her. The truth is, a great many of
the grown up inhabitants of the village call her _Ester_ also, dropping
the _h_ entirely, a habit common in Nova Scotia.

Esther's disposition is naturally mild and gentle. She can at times,
however, be very self-willed, and is bound to have her own way when her
mind is made up. If asked to do anything she does not feel like doing
she becomes very sulky and has to be humored at times to keep peace in
the family. However, all things considered, she is a good little girl
and has always borne a good reputation in every sense of the word.

There are two more boarders in the little cottage, who require a passing
notice. They are William Cox and John Teed. William is the brother of
Olive, Jane, and Esther, and is a shoemaker by trade, and one of Dan's
workmen in the factory.

The other boarder, John Teed, is Dan's brother. John, like his brother,
is an honest, hard working young man, has been raised a farmer, an
occupation he still follows when not boarding with Dan in Amherst.

As the reader may, perhaps, be anxious to know how Dan, good, honest
hard working Dan, and, his thrifty little wife Olive, look, I will
endeavor to give a short description of each. So here goes. Dan is
about thirty-five years old, and stands five feet eight in his
stockings. He has light brown hair, rather thin on top, a well shaped
head, blue eyes, well defined features, a high nose, and wears a heavy
moustache and bushy side whiskers; his complexion is florid; rheumatism
of several years standing has given him a slight halt in the left leg.
He does his work, spends his salary as he should, and leads a Christian
life, has a pew in the Wesleyan Church of which Rev. R.A. Temple is
pastor, belongs to a temperance society, and, I dare say, when he dies
will be well rewarded in the next world. Olive, as I have already said,
is not a very large woman. She is good and honest, like her husband, and
goes to church with him as a wife should. Her hair is dark brown, eyes
grey, complexion pale and slightly freckled. Although not as beautiful
as Jane, nor at any time as sulky as Esther can be, she has those
motherly traits of character which command respect. Being older than her
sisters she is looked up to by them for advice when they think they need
it, and consolation when they are in sorrow. Olive's wise little head is
sure to give the right advice at the right time, and in the family of
the cottage her word is law. I do not mean to say that she rules her
husband. No! Dan is far from being a hen-pecked man, but, as two heads
are always better than one, Dan often takes her advice and profits by
it.

Such is the cottage and household of honest Dan Teed.

To-day is cool and pleasant. The hour is nearly twelve noon--the hour
for dinner in the cottage. Esther is seated on the parlor floor playing
with George to keep him from running out in the hot sun. Willie is out
in the yard near the stable tormenting a poor hen, who has had a log of
wood tied to one of her legs by Olive to prevent her from setting in the
cow's stall; but master Willie seems to think she has been tied so that
he may have a good time banging her over the head with a small club,
which he is doing in a way that means business. Suddenly his mother
comes out of the kitchen, and after soundly boxing his ears, sends him
howling into the house, much to the relief of the poor hen who has just
fallen over with exhaustion and fright, but upon finding her tormentor
gone is soon herself again. Presently Olive hears Dan at the gate, and
comes to the front door to meet him and tell him that dinner is almost
ready, remarking that he cannot guess what she has for dessert. Honest
Dan replies that no matter what it is he is hungry and will eat it, for
he has been working hard. So in he goes to wash his hands and face at
the wash-stand in the kitchen.

Jane is coming down the street. Esther, who is seated on a chair with
George on her lap, sees her sister from the bay window in the parlor.
Jane has a position in Mr. Jas. P. Dunlap's establishment, and goes to
her work every morning at seven o'clock. As soon as Esther sees Jane she
takes George up in her arms and runs in to tell Olive that Jane is
coming, and suggests that dinner be served at once, for _she_ feels
hungry. So Olive, with Esther's assistance, puts the dinner on the
table, and they all sit down to enjoy the meal, and a good substantial
meal it is; plenty of beef-steak and onions, plenty of hot mashed
potatoes, plenty of boiled cabbage, and an abundance of home made bread
and fresh butter made that very morning from the rich cream of Dan's red
cow. Little George, who is seated in his high chair at his mother's
right hand, commences to kick the bottom of the table in such a vigorous
manner that not one word can be heard, for he makes a terrible noise,
the toes of his shoes being faced with copper to prevent the youngster
from wearing them out too soon. Olive asks Esther to please get the old
pink scarf and tie his feet so that he will be unable to make such a
racket, Esther does not move, but upon being requested a second time
gets up rather reluctantly, goes to the hat rack in the hall, gets the
scarf and ties the little fellow's feet, as requested. Upon reseating
herself at the table it is noticeable that she has a sulky expression,
for she does not like to be disturbed while enjoying dinner, nor in fact
any meal, for the simple reason that her appetite is voracious, being
particularly fond of pickles, and she has been known to drink a cupful
of vinegar in a day.

All ate in silence for some minutes, when Jane inquires if the cow was
milked again last night? "Yes," says Dan, and "I only wish I could find
out who does it; it would not be well for him, I can tell you. This is
the tenth time this fortnight that she has been milked. Oh! if it was
not for this rheumatism in my hip, I would stay up some night and catch
the thief in the act, have him arrested, and--"

"And then," remarks Esther, with an eye to the financial part of the
milk question, "we should have just two quarts more to sell every day;
that would be--let me see how much it would come to."

"Never mind," remarks John Teed, "how much it would come to, just hand
me that dish of potatoes, please. They are so well mashed that I must
eat some more. I can't bear potatoes with lumps all through them, can
you Jane."

"No, John, I cannot," replies Jane.

"Neither can I," joins in William Cox; "if I ever marry I hope my wife
will be as good a cook as Olive; if she prove so I shall be satisfied."

"Gim me 'nother piece of meat, do you hear," is the exclamation which
comes from master Willie.

"Ask as a good boy should," remarks Dan, "and you shall have it."

"Gim me 'nother piece of meat, do you hear," says the young rascal a
second time, louder than before.

A good sound box on the ear from his father, prevents further remarks
coming from the unruly boy during the rest of the meal. However, after a
slight pause, Dan gives him a piece of beef-steak, his mother in the
meantime says:

"I wonder how that boy learns to be so rude."

"Why," replies John Teed, "by playing with those bad boys down near the
carriage factory. I saw him there about nine o'clock this morning, and
what's more, I can tell you that unless he keeps away from them he will
be ruined."

"I'm going to take him in hand as soon as he gets a little older and
make him toe the mark," says Dan. "Well Mudge,"--Dan nearly always calls
his wife Mudge, for a pet name--"give me another cup of tea, woman, and
then I'll go back to the factory, that is as soon as I have taken a pull
or two at my pipe."

"What! are you going without eating some of the bread pudding I went to
the trouble of making because I thought you would like it?" asks Olive.

"Oh, you've got pudding have you; all right, I'll have some if it's
cold," replies Dan.

"Oh, yes, it's cold enough by this time. Come, Esther, help me to clear
away these dishes, and you, Jane, please bring in the pudding, it is out
on the door-step near the rain-water barrel."

The dishes having been cleared away, and the pudding brought, all ate a
due share, and after some further conversation about the midnight milker
of the cow, Esther remarks that she believes the thief to be one of the
Micmac Indians from the camp up the road. Everybody laughs at such a
wild idea, and they all leave the table. Esther, takes George from his
chair, after first untying his feet, and then helps Olive to remove the
dishes to the kitchen, where she washes them, and then goes to the sofa
in the parlor to take a nap. Dan in the meantime has enjoyed his smoke
and gone back to the factory, as has also William Cox. John Teed has
gone up the Main Street to see his sister Maggie, and Jane has returned
to Mr. Dunlap's. Willie is out in the street again with the bad boys,
and Olive has just commenced to make a new plaid dress for George, who
has gone to sleep in his little crib in the small sewing-room.

Esther, after sleeping for about an hour, comes into the dining room
where Olive is sewing and says, "Olive, I am going out to take a walk,
and if Bob should come while I am out, don't forget to tell him that I
will be in this evening, and shall expect him."

"All right Esther," says her sister, "but you had better be careful
about Bob, and how you keep company with him; you know what we heard
about him only the day before yesterday."

"Oh, I don't believe a word of it," replied Esther. She looked at her
sister for a moment, and then said in an injured tone, "I guess I am old
enough to take care of myself. What! half-past two already? I must be
off;" and off she went.

Supper being over, Esther put on her brown dress and took her accustomed
seat on the front door step to talk to Dan, as he smoked his evening
pipe. Jane dressed in her favorite white dress, trimmed with black
velvet, her beautiful hair fastened in a true Grecian coil, and
perfectly smooth at the temples, is in the parlor attending to her
choice plants, presently her beau comes to spend the evening with her.

So the evening passes away. Olive has sung little George to sleep,
carried him up to bed and retired herself. Dan has smoked his pipe and
retired also. It was now ten o'clock. Esther still sat on the front step
humming the tune of a well known Wesleyan hymn to herself as she gazed
up at the stars, for it must be remembered that although she was not by
any means pious, still, like a dutiful girl, she went to church with Dan
and Olive. As the girl was just passing into womanhood, and felt that
she must love something, it was perfectly natural for her to sit there
and wait for Bob to make his appearance. About half-past ten Jane's beau
took his departure, and Jane not having anything further to keep her up,
decided to retire, and advised Esther to follow her example.

Esther took a last look up and down the street, and then went into the
house with much reluctance. After locking the front door the girls went
into the dining room and Jane lighted the lamp. Esther had taken off her
shoes and thrown them on the floor, as was her custom, when it suddenly
occurred to her that there was butter-milk in the cellar, and the same
instant she made up her mind to have some. Taking the lamp from Jane,
she runs into the cellar in her stocking feet, drinks about a pint of
butter-milk and runs up again, telling her sister, who has been
meanwhile in the dark dining room, that a large rat passed between her
feet while in the cellar.

"Come right up to bed you silly girl," said Jane, "and don't be talking
about rats at this time of night." So Jane took the lamp and Esther
picked up her shoes, and they went to their bed-room.

After closing the door of their room, "Esther," said Jane, "you are
foolish to think anything at all about Bob."

"Oh, mind your own business, Jane," Esther replied "let's say our
prayers and retire;" and so they did.




CHAPTER II.

THE FATAL RIDE.


Esther and Jane arose on the morning of August 28th, 1878, as was their
usual custom, at half-past six, and ate breakfast with the rest of the
family.

After breakfast Jane went to Mrs. Dunlap's, Dan to his shoe factory with
his brother-in-law, William Cox, John Teed also went to _his_ work, and
none of the family remained in the house but Olive and Esther, who
commenced to wash up the breakfast dishes and put the dining room in
order, so that part of their work at least should be finished before the
two little boys came down stairs to have their childish wants attended
to. What with making the beds and sweeping the rooms, and washing out
some clothing for the boys, both Esther and Olive found plenty to occupy
their time until the hour for preparing dinner arrived. When Olive
commenced that rather monotonous operation, assisted by Esther, who, as
she sat on the door-step between the dining room and kitchen paring
potatoes, and placing them in a can of cold water beside her, attracted
her sister's attention by her continued silence and the troubled
expression of her countenance.

"What in the name of the sun ails you to-day, Esther?" inquired Olive,
really worried by her little sister's sad appearance.

"Oh, nothing, Olive! only I was thinking that if--that if--that if--"

"Well! well, go on, go on, it is not necessary to say that if--five or
six times in succession, is it, before telling me what's the matter with
you, you nonsensical, giddy, hard-headed girl. I believe you have fallen
in love so with Bob McNeal, that you are worrying yourself to death
because you know he is too poor to marry you and you are afraid some
rich girl will fall in love with him, and that he will marry her and
give you the cold shoulder. There, that's just what I think _is_ the
matter with you, and I can tell you one thing my young lady, and that
is, that the sooner you get over your infatuation for that young man,
the better for you, and the better for us all. There now, I'm done. No
I'm not either, listen to me, girl, and don't make me angry by turning
up your nose while I am giving you good advice."

"I'm not turning up my nose at you, Olive. I only felt like sneezing,
and wanted to stop it before it had fully commenced, and how could I try
to stop it except by working my nose in that way, when I have a big wet
potato in one hand and this ugly old knife in the other, and all wet,
too."

"Oh, nonsense, girl, don't keep on talking about ugly old knives and wet
potatoes, but listen to me. I feel it in my bones that trouble is in
store for us, and all through Bob McNeal. Now do be a good girl, and
take my advice and never invite him to call again; because I tell you,
Esther, that trouble is coming to you through that young man, for I feel
it in my bones."

"Well, Olive, I will tell you the truth; the fact is that--why here's
Jane! Why, Jane, what has brought you home at this time of day? It is
only eleven, and dinner won't be ready for an hour."

Jane, who had just taken off her hat and hung it up in the hall,
replied, "that as there was nothing more to be done at Dunlap's until
the afternoon, she thought she might as well be at home attending to her
plants as at the shop."

After looking at Esther and Olive a moment, she said, "What were you two
putting your heads together about when I came in? Esther stopped
talking as soon as she saw me, and Olive, I noticed that you went to the
stove and poured so much water into the tea-kettle from the bucket that
it ran over, just because you were looking at me instead of at the
kettle. You are both up to something, I know you are. Now come, tell me
all about it; is it a great secret? I won't tell anybody; tell me, do."

Esther, who has just finished paring the potatoes and is now putting
them on the stove to boil, takes a seat in the dining room on the settee
and has one of her sulky moods, during which she always declines to
speak when spoken to.

Jane looks at her a second and then says in a playful manner, "Oh, it's
all right, Esther, I can guess what it was; what nonsense. I'll go and
attend to my plants. Why, I declare it's a quarter past eleven already,
and I have got to comb my hair before dinner, too. Oh! my, how time
flies!"

So off Jane goes to her plants in the parlor, leaving Esther in the
dining room and Olive in the kitchen getting dinner ready as fast as she
can.

Olive had just gone behind the kitchen door that leads into the yard to
get another stick of wood for the fire when she was startled by a
scream; she feels instinctively that one of her children is in danger,
and she is right, for little George has just been saved from a horrible
death by Maud Weldon, their next door neighbor. The little scamp had
managed to crawl through the fence and get as far as the middle of the
street, when Maud saw him, and was just in time to prevent him from
being run over by a heavy wagon drawn by a pair of horses that were
being driven at a breakneck pace past the house. Of course the fair Maud
screamed, young women generally do at such times; but she saved George
all the same. Her piercing shriek brought the stately Miss Sibley and
her mother to the door of their house, which is almost directly opposite
Dan's, and also caused Mrs. Mitchell and Mrs. Bell to become so nervous
that they kept their children in the house for the rest of the day, when
they heard of the dangerous adventure George had had, for they both
arrived too late to witness the rescue. The watchfulness and care they
both bestowed on their little ones for the next week was so much time
thrown away, however, for it so happened that no more fast teams came
through that particular street for about a month.

Well, after the brave blonde, Maud Weldon, had become the heroine of the
hour, she went into Dan's cottage with Esther and Jane, who both ran out
when they heard the scream. Olive had already taken her boy in, washed
his little hands and face, put on his clean over-dress, and was now
holding him in her lap in the large rocking-chair. Maud Weldon was in
the parlor with Jane and Esther looking at the flowers and telling them
about her new beau, how handsome he was, and that she intended to marry
him if he asked her, winding up her conversation on the subject of beaux
with the remark that she was bound not to die an old maid, but was going
to get married for she wanted to have a house of her own to keep. And so
the conversation ran on between the three girls in the parlor until
dinner was nearly ready, when Mrs. Hicks, Maud's aunt, called her and
she went home.

After dinner, Esther and Olive were washing the dishes in the kitchen
and talking over George's narrow escape, when Esther suddenly made up
her mind to tell her sister what she was about to do when Jane's rather
unexpected return from the shop put an end to their conversation. So
after having put all the dishes away in the pantry, she told Olive if
she would promise not to tell anybody, not even Dan, she would tell her
something that must be kept a secret, because if it became known it
might make people nervous and could do no good.

"Very well," replied Olive, "wait until I get my sewing, then we will go
into the parlor, you can tell me all about it, and I promise that I
won't tell."

So they went into the parlor. Esther sat in the rocking-chair and Olive
on the sofa.

"Well, Olive," said Esther. "Now don't laugh, for it is about a dream."

"A dream!" exclaimed Olive. "A dream! go on, let me hear it."

"Well," began Esther, "last night I sat for two hours on the front step
looking at the stars. After I came in I went down into the cellar in my
stocking feet and drank about a pint of butter-milk and a large rat ran
between my feet; then Jane and I went to our room, shut the door, said
our prayers and went to bed, and in a short time we both fell asleep,
and I dreamt that when I got up in the morning every thing and every
body was changed except myself. This cottage instead of being yellow was
green; you, Dan, Jane, brother William, John Teed, Willie and George,
all had heads like bears, and you all growled at me, but yet could talk,
and, what was very strange, you all had eyes as large as horses' eyes,
only they were as red as blood. While I was talking to you I heard a
noise in the street and on going to the door I saw hundreds of black
bulls with blue eyes, very bright blue eyes, coming towards the house,
blood was dripping from their mouths and their feet made fire come out
of the ground. On they came, roaring very loudly all the time, right
straight for the house. They broke down the fence, I shut the front
door, locked it and then ran to the back door and fastened it. Then they
all commenced to butt the house so violently that it nearly fell over.
It shook so that I woke up and found that I had fallen out of bed
without waking Jane. So I got in again and soon fell asleep; but the
dream is still in my mind. I can see it still, and wonder what it means
until I get the head-ache. What do you think about it Olive? Do you
think there is any truth in dreams? Did you ever know of one to come
true, or do you think it was all caused by the pint of butter-milk and
my going into the cellar in my stocking feet, and the rat?"

"Well," said Olive, "I never could make up my mind fully on that
subject; but of this I am certain, whatever Dan dreams comes true; there
is no doubt about that. But don't tell him anything about this dream,
Esther, or he will be floundering around all night trying to find out
what it means; or Jane either, because, perhaps, it will scare her so
that she will be unable to sleep."

"Don't believe it, Olive, I have told Jane, and she says it was all
caused by the butter-milk I drank. She says it made me see a rat in the
cellar just after I had drank it, and that it was no wonder I saw bears
and bulls, too, after I went to sleep. Oh, my sakes alive, if I only had
a dream book, like the one Mrs. Emery used to have, I'd soon find out
what it means. Do you know, Olive, I have a great mind to go out to the
Indian camp this very afternoon and try if that fortune-telling squaw
who told Maggie Teed's fortune, and Mary Miller's, too, can't tell me
all about it. I want to know if it means that something terrible is
about to happen or not."

"Well," said Olive, "Esther, don't talk any more about it but read your
Bible, go to church, say your prayers, and ask God to take care of you;
then you need never fear dreams or anything else, for you must always
remember that God has more power than the devil, and always will have."

"Oh!" replied Esther, with a smile, "it is all very Well for you to talk
in that way, but I shouldn't wonder if the devil saw more of me than he
ever has yet before I die."

"Oh, Esther, how can you talk so; you ought to be ashamed of yourself,
and to think that you were brought up by grandmother too."

And so the afternoon passed slowly away, the beautiful blue sky which
had been so clear all day began to assume a darkish aspect, and
threatening clouds spread themselves between the earth and heaven. By
the time Dan and the rest had come home to supper, it looked very much
like rain. Dan said it was going to rain sometime during the night; he
knew it, because his rheumatism was bad.

Supper being ready, they all sat down and enjoyed it. After supper Dan
took a smoke, Jane went to her accustomed seat in the parlor near her
plants, William Cox and John Teed went out to see their girls, Olive put
the boys to bed, and Esther sat down on the front door-step all by
herself and sang "The Sweet By-and-bye" in a low voice.

The hands of the old fashioned clock in the dining room indicated ten
minutes to eight, when a carriage drove up to the gate, and a well built
young man jumped out, opened the gate and came in. As he entered the
house he shook hands with Esther, saying as he did so: "Go and put on
your hat and sack and take a ride with me Esther, and I will tell you
why I did not call last evening as I promised." This young man was Bob
McNeal, by trade a shoemaker, and a fine looking young fellow he was,
too. His hair and eyes were black, features, rather handsome, and he
wore a small black moustache.

As soon as Esther had received his invitation she ran up stairs, got her
hat and sack, ran down again, jumped into the carriage, which was a
buggy with room for two only, and off they drove. Jane came out to the
front door and called after them, just as they were driving away: "You
had better put the top up Bob, for it will certainly rain before long."

Dan, who had been sitting in the dining room in one of the easy chairs,
remarked to Jane as he was going up stairs: "What a pity Bob McNeal is
such a wild fellow. I'm afraid he will never amount to much. He is a
remarkably fine workman too; he has improved in his work since I took
him into the factory with me. Oh well, I suppose it's all right; good
night Jane."

"Good night Dan," said Jane.

"I hope your rheumatism will be better in the morning."

"So do I," replied Dan. And up he went to bed, Jane returning to the
parlor to wait for her beau.

Bob and Esther drove through Amherst, and turned down the road leading
to the Marsh. They were going to take a ride into the country. Bob said
that was the best road to take, and Esther did not care much which way
they went, so she got a ride.

While driving through a small wood, Bob seemed to be suddenly seized
with an attack of what lawyers are pleased to term emotional insanity,
for he dropped the reins and leaped from the buggy. Upon reaching the
ground, he drew from the side pocket of his coat a large revolver, and,
pointing it at Esther, told her, in a loud voice, to get out of the
buggy or he would kill her where she sat. She, of course, refused to do
as he requested or rather commanded, and, as it was raining and becoming
quite dark, she told him to get into the buggy and drive her home, and
not act like a crazy man. The remark about acting like a crazy man
seemed to enrage him past endurance, for he uttered several terrible
oaths, and, aiming the revolver at her heart, was about to fire, when
the sound of wheels were heard rumbling in the distance. He immediately
jumped into the buggy, seized the reins, and drove at a breakneck pace
through the pouring rain to Dan's cottage. Esther was wet through by the
time they had arrived at the gate. She jumped out, opened the gate,
entered the cottage and ran up stairs without noticing Jane, whom she
passed in the hall. Bob, as soon as she got out, drove rapidly down the
street.

As the hour was now ten o'clock, Esther immediately retired and, after
crying herself to sleep, slept until morning. Jane entered the room
about half an hour after her sister, engaged in prayer and then retired,
without disturbing her.

For the next four days Esther seemed to be suffering from some secret
sorrow. She could not remain in the house, but was continually on the
street, or at some of the neighbors' houses, and every night she cried
herself to sleep.

Of course her woe-begone appearance was noticed by the family, but they
refrained from questioning her, for the simple reason that they supposed
she and Bob had quarrelled; and as they did not approve of the
attachment between him and Esther, they were rather glad that his visits
had ceased, and gave no further attention to the matter, supposing that
she would be herself again in a week or two. Bob's continued absence
from the cottage--for he used to be there every other day--strengthened
them in the belief that they were right in their supposition, and so
they let the matter rest.




CHAPTER III.

THE HAUNTED HOUSE.


Supper is just over. Dan and Olive are in the parlor. Jane is up stairs
in her room, talking to Esther who has retired early; it being only
seven o'clock, she asks Esther: "How long she is going to continue to
worry herself about Bob?"

Not receiving a reply, she puts on her heavy sack and remarks: "I am
going over to see Miss Porter, and will soon return; it is so damp and
foggy to-night that, I declare, it makes me feel sleepy too. I think I
will follow your example, and retire early. Good night, I suppose you
will be asleep by the time I get back;" and off she goes.

As the night is so very damp and disagreeable, all begin to feel sleepy
long before half-past eight, and go up to their rooms.

Before Dan goes up stairs, he takes the bucket and brings some fresh
water from the pump--which he, as usual, places on the kitchen
table--taking a large tin dipper about half full up to his room for the
children to drink during the night.

It is now about fifteen minutes to nine. Jane has just returned from her
visit, and has gone to her room, which is in the front of the house,
near the stairway, and directly next to Dan and Olive's room. She finds
Esther crying, as usual, for the girl has actually cried herself to
sleep every night since the fatal ride. After getting into bed, she
says: "Oh, my, I forgot to put the lamp out," rises immediately and
extinguishes the light, remarks to Esther that "it is very dark," bumps
her head against the bed post, and finally settles herself down for a
good sleep.

Esther, who has just stopped crying, remarks to Jane that "this is a
wretched night," and says, "somehow I can't get to sleep."

"No wonder," says Jane, "you went to bed too early."

"Jane, this is September the fourth, aint it?" asks Esther.

"Yes," replies Jane. "Go to sleep and let me alone, I don't want to talk
to you, I want to go to sleep. What if it is September the fourth."

"Oh nothing," replies Esther, "only it is just a week to-night, since I
went riding with Bob! Oh, what will become of me?" and she instantly
burst into another crying spell.

"Esther" said Jane, "Do you know I think you are losing your mind, and
that if you keep on this way you will get so crazy that we will have to
put you in the Insane Asylum." This had the desired effect, for she
stopped instantly. For a few minutes everything was perfectly still. No
sound was to be heard except the breathing of the two young girls, as
they lay side by side in bed.

They had remained perfectly quiet, for about ten or fifteen minutes,
when Esther jumped out of bed with a scream, exclaiming that there was a
mouse under the bed clothes.

Her scream startled her sister, who was almost asleep, and she also got
out of bed and lit the lamp, for she is as much afraid of mice as Esther
is. They both searched the bed, but could not find the supposed mouse,
supposing it to be inside the mattrass. Jane exclaimed "Oh pshaw, what
fools we are to be sure to be scared at a little harmless mouse; if
there really is one here it can do us no harm, for see, it is inside the
mattrass, look how the straw is being moved about. The mouse has gotten
inside and can't get out, because there is no hole in the ticking. Let
us go back to bed Esther. It can do us no harm now." So they put out the
light, and got into bed again. After listening for a few minutes without
hearing the straw move in the mattrass, they both fell asleep.

On the following night the girls heard something moving under their bed.
Esther exclaimed: "There is that mouse again, Jane. Let us get up and
kill it. I'm not going to be worried by mice every night."

So they both arose, and on hearing a rustling in a green paste-board
box, filled with patch-work, which was under the bed, they placed it out
in the middle of the room and were much amazed to see the box jump up in
the air about a foot and then fall over on its side. The girls could not
believe their own eyes; so Jane placed the box in its old position in
the middle of the room, and both watched it intently, when to their
amazement the same thing occurred again. The girls were now really
frightened, and screamed as loudly as they could for Dan, who put on
some clothing and came into their room to ascertain what was the matter.
They told him what had just taken place, but he only laughed, and after
pushing the box under the bed, and remarking that they must be insane or
perhaps had been dreaming, he went back to bed grumbling because his
rest had been disturbed.

The next morning the girls both declared that the box had really moved;
but, as nobody believed them, they saw it was of no use to talk of the
matter. Jane went to the shop, Dan to his shoe factory, and William Cox
and John Teed about their business as usual, leaving Olive and Esther to
attend to their household duties. After dinner Olive took her sewing
into the parlor, and Esther went out to walk. The afternoon was
delightful, and there was quite a breeze blowing from the bay. Walking
is very pleasant when there is no dust; but Amherst is such a dusty
little village, especially when the wind blows from the bay, that it is
impossible to walk on any of the streets with comfort on a windy day
during the summer. Esther found this to be the case, so she retraced her
steps homeward, stopping at the post office and at Bird's book store,
where she bought a bottle of ink from Miss Blanche. On arriving at the
cottage she hung up her hat and joined Olive in the parlor, took little
George on her lap, and, after singing him to sleep, lay down on the sofa
and took a nap.

After supper Esther took her accustomed seat on the door-step, remaining
there until the moon had risen. It was a beautiful moonlight night,
almost as bright as day. While seated there gazing at the moon, she said
to herself, "Well there is one thing certain anyhow, I am going to have
good luck all this month, for on Sunday night I saw the new moon over my
shoulder."

At half-past eight o'clock, Esther complained of feeling feverish and
was advised by Olive and Jane to go to bed, which she did.

About ten o'clock Jane retired for the night. After she had been in bed
some fifteen minutes, Esther jumped with a sudden bound into the centre
of the room, taking all the bed clothes with her.

"My God!" she exclaimed, "what can be the matter with me! Wake up Jane,
wake up! I'm dying, I'm dying!" "Dying!" responded Jane; "why dying
people don't speak in that loud tone. Wait until I light the lamp, don't
die in the dark Esther."

Jane thought her sister only had the night mare, but when she lit the
lamp, she was considerably alarmed by her sister's appearance. There
stood Esther in the centre of the room, her short hair almost standing
on end, her face as red as blood, and her eyes really looked as if they
were about to start from their sockets, her hands were grasping the back
of a chair so tightly that her nails sank into the soft wood. She was
truly an object to look on with amazement, as she stood there in her
white night gown trembling with fear. Her sister called as loudly as she
could for assistance; for Jane, too, was pretty well frightened by this
time, and did not know what to do. Olive was the first to enter the
room, having first thrown a shawl around her shoulders, for the night
was very chilly. Dan, put on his coat and pants in a hurry, as did also
William Cox, and John Teed, and the three men entered the room about the
same time.

"Why what in the name of thunder ails you Esther?" asked Dan. William
and John exclaimed in the same breath, "She's mad!"

Olive was speechless with amazement, while they stood looking at the
girl, not knowing what to do to relieve her terrible agony. She became
very pale and seemed to be growing weak; in fact, she became so weak in
a short time that she had to be assisted to the bed. After sitting on
the edge of the bed for a moment, and gazing about the room with a
vacant stare, she started to her feet with a wild yell, and said she
felt like bursting into pieces.

"Great Heavens," exclaimed Olive, "What shall we do with her; she is
crazy?"

Jane, who always retains her presence of mind, took her sister's hand
and said in a soothing tone: "Come Esther, get into bed again." As they
found that she could not do so without assistance, Olive and Jane helped
her, and placed the bed clothing over her again. As soon as she had been
assisted to bed she said in a low choking voice, "I am swelling up and
shall certainly burst, I know I shall."

Dan looked at her face and remarked in a startled tone. "Why, the girl
is swelling, Olive, just look at her, look at her hands too, see how
swollen they are, and she is as hot as fire."

She was literally burning up with fever, and yet as pale as death, while
only a few minutes before her face was as red as blood, and her entire
person as cold as ice. What a strange case, pale when hot, and blood
red when cold, yet such was really the fact.

While the family stood looking at her, wondering what would relieve her,
for her entire body had swollen to an enormous size and she was
screaming with pain and grinding her teeth as if in a fit, a loud report
like thunder was heard in the room. They all started to their feet
instantly and seemed paralyzed with fear.

"My God!" exclaimed Olive, "the house has been struck by lightning and I
know my poor boys are killed?"

After giving vent to this exclamation, she rushed from the room to her
own where the children were, and found them both sleeping soundly, so
she returned to the room where they all stood looking at Esther, and
wondering what had produced the terrible sound. On entering, Olive told
them that the boys were both sound asleep.

"I wonder what that awful noise was?" she said. Going to the window and
raising the curtain she saw that the stars were shining brightly and was
then satisfied that it had not been thunder they had heard. Just as she
let the curtain drop, three terrific reports were heard, apparently
directly under the bed. They were so loud that the whole room shook, and
Esther who a moment before had been swollen to such an enormous size,
immediately assumed her natural appearance, and sank into a state of
calm repose. As soon as they found that it was sleep and not death that
had taken possession of her, they all left the room except Jane, who
went back to bed beside her sister, but could not sleep a wink for the
balance of the night.

The next day Esther remained in bed until about nine o'clock, when she
arose, seemingly all right again, and got her own breakfast. As her
appetite was not as good as usual, all she could eat was a small piece
of bread and butter and a large green pickle, washed down with a cup of
strong tea. She helped Olive with her work as usual, and after dinner
took a walk past the post office, around the block and back to the
cottage again. At supper the usual conversation about the strange sounds
took place, all wondering what had caused them. As no one could
ascertain the cause they gave it up as something too strange to think
about, and all agreed not to let the neighbors know anything about it,
because they argued, that, as no one would be likely to believe that
such strange sounds had been heard under the bed, the best thing to do
was to keep the matter quiet.

About four nights after the loud reports had been heard, Esther had
another similar attack. It came on about ten o'clock at night, just as
she was getting in bed. This time, however, she managed to get into bed
before the attack had swelled her up to any great extent. Jane, who had
already retired, advised her to remain perfectly still, and perhaps the
attack would pass off, but how sadly was she mistaken. Esther had only
been in bed about five minutes when, to the amazement of the girls, all
the bed clothing flew off and settled down in the far corner of the
room. They could see them going for the lamp was burning dimly on the
table. They both screamed, and then Jane fainted dead away. The family
rushed into the room as before, and were so frightened that they did not
know what to do. There lay the bed clothes in the corner, Esther all
swollen up, Jane in a dead faint, and perhaps really dead for all they
knew, for by the glare of the lamp, which Dan held in his hand, she
looked more dead than alive. Olive was the first to come to her senses.
Taking up the bed clothes, she placed them over her sisters. Just as she
had done so, off they flew again to the same corner of the room. In less
time than it takes to count three, the pillow flew from under Esther's
head and struck John Teed in the face. He immediately left the room,
saying that he had had enough. He could not be induced to return and sit
on the edge of the bed with the others, who in that way managed to keep
the clothes in their place. Jane had by this time recovered from her
swoon. William Cox went down to the kitchen for a bucket of water to
bathe Esther's head, which was aching terribly. Just as he got to the
door of the room again with the bucket of water, a succession of reports
were heard, which seemed to come from the bed where Esther lay. They
were so very loud that the whole room shook, and Esther, who had a
moment before been swollen up, commenced to assume her natural
appearance, and in a few minutes fell into a pleasant sleep. As
everything seemed now to be all right again, everybody went back to bed.

In the morning Esther and Jane were both very weak, particularly Esther.
She, however, got up when her sister did, and lay down on the sofa in
the parlor. At breakfast they all agreed that a doctor had better be
called in. So in the afternoon Dan left the factory early and went to
see Dr. Caritte. The doctor laughed when Dan told him what had occurred.
He said he would call in the evening and remain until one in the morning
if necessary, but did not hesitate to say that what Dan had told him was
all nonsense, remarking that he knew no such tomfoolery would occur
while he was in the house.

As the hands of the clock pointed to ten, in walked the doctor. Bidding
everybody a hearty good evening, he took a seat near Esther, who had
been in bed since nine o'clock, but as yet had not been afflicted with
one of her strange attacks. The doctor felt her pulse, looked at her
tongue, and then told the family that she seemed to be suffering from
nervous excitement and had evidently received a tremendous shock of some
kind. Just as he had said these words, the pillow from under her head
left the bed, with the exception of one corner, which remained under
her head, straightened itself out as if filled with air, and then went
back to its place again. The doctor's large, blue eyes opened to their
utmost capacity, as he asked in a low tone: "Did you all see that; it
went back again."

"So it did," remarked John Teed, "but if it moves out again it will not
go back, for I intend to hold on to it, even if it did bang me over the
head last night."

John had no sooner spoken these words than out came the pillow from
under Esther's head as before. He waited until it had just started back
again, and then grasped it with both hands, and held on with all his
strength. The pillow, however, was pulled from him by some invisible
power stronger than himself. As he felt it being pulled away, his hair
actually stood on end.

"How wonderful!" exclaimed Dr. Caritte.

Just as the doctor arose from his chair, the reports under the bed
commenced, as on the previous night. The doctor looked beneath the bed,
but failed to ascertain what caused the sounds. When he walked to the
door the sounds followed him, being now produced on the floor of the
room. In about a minute after this, off went the bed clothes again, and
before they had been put back on the bed, the sound as of some person
writing on the wall with a sharp instrument was heard. All looked at the
wall whence the sound of writing came, when to their great astonishment
there was seen written, near the head of the bed, in large characters,
these words: "Esther Cox, you are mine to kill." Everybody could see the
writing plainly, and yet only a moment before nothing was to be seen but
the blank wall.

The reader can imagine their utter amazement at what had just taken
place. There they stood around the bed of this wonderful girl, each
watching the other to see that there was no deception. They knew these
marvellous things had taken place, for all heard them with their own
ears and beheld them with their own eyes. Still, they could not believe
their own senses, it was all so strange. But the writing on the
wall--what did it mean, and how came it there? God only knew.

As Doctor Caritte stood in the doorway for a moment wondering to himself
what it all meant, a large piece of plaster came flying from the wall of
the room, having in its flight turned a corner and fallen at his feet.
The good doctor picked it up mechanically and placed it on a chair. He
was too astonished to speak. Just as he did so, the poundings commenced
again with redoubled power, this time shaking the entire room. It must
be remembered that during all this time Esther lay upon the bed, almost
frightened to death by what was occurring. After this state of things
had continued for about two hours, everything became quiet and she went
to sleep. The doctor said he would not give her any medicine until the
next morning, when he would call at nine and give her something to quiet
her nerves; for she was certainly suffering from some nervous trouble.
As to the sounds and movements of objects, he could not account for
them, but thought if she became strong again they would cease.

In the morning the doctor called as he had promised, and was much
surprised to see Esther up and dressed, helping Olive to wash the
dishes. She told him that she felt all right again, only she was so
nervous that any sudden noise made her jump. Having occasion to go down
into the cellar with a pan of milk, she came running up, out of breath,
exclaiming that there was some one down in the cellar, for a piece of
plank had been thrown at her. The doctor went down to see for himself,
Esther remaining in the dining room; for it must be borne in mind that
the cellar door opens into the dining room. In a moment he came up again
remarking that there was nobody down there to throw a piece of plank,
nor anything else.

"Esther, come down with me," said he. So down they both went, when, to
their great surprise, several potatoes came flying at their heads. That
was enough. They both beat a hasty retreat. The doctor left the house,
and called again in the evening, with several very powerful sedatives,
morphia being one, which he administered to Esther about ten o'clock as
she lay in bed. She still complained of her nervousness, and said she
felt as if electricity was passing all through her body. He had given
her the medicine, and had just remarked that she would have a good
night's rest when the loud sounds commenced, only they were much louder
and in more rapid succession than on the previous nights. Presently the
sounds left the room and were heard on the roof of the house. The doctor
instantly left the house and went out into the street, hearing the
sounds while in the open air. He returned to the house more nonplussed
than ever, and told the family that from the street it seemed as if some
person was on the roof with a heavy sledge hammer pounding away to try
and break through the shingles. Being a moonlight night he could see
distinctly that there was not any one out on the roof. He remained until
twelve. Everything becoming quiet again, he then departed, saying he
would call the next day. When he had got as far as the gate, the sounds
on the roof commenced again with great violence, and continued until he
had gone about two hundred yards from the cottage, at which distance he
could still hear them distinctly.

The next week it became known throughout Amherst that strange things
were going on at Dan Teed's cottage. The mysterious sounds had been
heard by people in the street as they passed the house, and the
poundings now commenced in the morning and were to be heard all day
long. Esther always felt relieved when the sounds were produced by the
unknown power.

Dr. Caritte called every night, and sometimes during the day, but could
not afford her the slightest relief. One night, about three weeks after
the doctor's first visit, as he and the family were standing around her
bed listening to the loud knockings, Esther suddenly threw her arms up
towards the head of the bed, and seemed to be seized with a spasm, for
she became cold and perfectly rigid. While in this state she commenced
to talk, and told all that had occurred between herself and Bob McNeal
on the night of the fatal ride. This was the first anybody knew of the
affair, for she had never told of it, and Bob had never been seen in the
locality after that night. When she came to her senses again, they told
her what had been said by herself during the strange state from which
she had just emerged. Upon hearing this she commenced to cry, and told
them that it was all true; that he had threatened her with his revolver,
but becoming frightened by the sound of wheels in the distance, had
driven her home without offering her any further show of violence.

"There!" exclaimed Olive, "Didn't I tell you that I felt it in my bones,
that harm would come to you through that young man, and now you see he
really is at the bottom of all this. Ah, it is Bob, who makes all these
strange sounds about the house; I know he is the cause." Instantly three
distinct reports were heard, shaking the whole house with their
violence.

"Do you know doctor," said Jane, "that I believe that whatever agency
makes these noises, it can hear and understand what we are talking
about, and perhaps see us." The moment she had finished the sentence,
three distinct reports were heard as loud as before.

"Ask if it can hear us doctor?" said Dan. "Can you, whatever you are,
hear what we say?" asked Dr. Caritte.

Again three reports were heard, which shook the entire house.

"Why, that is very singular," remarked the doctor. "I believe Jane was
right, it can hear."

"Well, let us try again," said Dan. "If you can see and hear, tell us
how many persons are in this room?" Esther did not know how many were
present, for she was lying in the bed, with her face buried in the
pillow trembling with fear. As Dan did not receive an answer, he asked
again.

"How many persons are in the room? Give us a knock on the floor for each
one." Five distinct knocks were made by the strange force on the floor,
and there were just five persons in the room, as follows:--Dr. Caritte,
Dan, Olive, Esther and Jane, William Cox and John Teed having left the
room after Esther had burried her face in the pillow. "Well, it
certainly is strange remarked the doctor, but I must go, it is getting
late." So he departed after saying he would call the next evening.

The next evening the Doctor called and remained for about an hour, but
as nothing occurred he departed feeling rather disappointed. For the
next three weeks no one could tell when the manifestations would take
place. Sometimes they would commence in the morning and continue all
day, and at other times they would only take place after Esther had
retired. It had now become a settled fact that Esther must be in the
house or there would be no manifestations of any kind. They never
occurred during her absence.

About one month after the commencement of the manifestations, Dr. Edwin
Clay, the well known Baptist clergyman, called at the house to behold
the wonders with his own eyes. He had read some little account of them
in the newspapers, but was desirious of seeing and hearing for himself,
not taking much stock, as the saying is, in what other people told him
about the affair. However, he was fortunate enough to have his desire
fully gratified. He heard the loudest kind of knocks, in answer to his
various questions, saw the mysterious writing on the wall, and left the
house fully satisfied that Esther did not produce any of the
manifestations herself, and that the family did not assist her as some
people believed. He, however, was of the opinion that through the shock
her system had received the night she went riding, she had become in
some mysterious manner an electric battery. His theory being, that
invisible flashes of lightening left her person, and that the knocks
which every body could hear distinctly, were simply minute claps of
thunder. He lectured on his theory, and drew large audiences as he
always does, no matter what the subject is. Perfectly satisfied that the
manifestations are genuine, he has nobly defended Esther Cox from the
platform and the pulpit.

Rev. R.A. Temple, the well known Wesleyan minister pastor of the
Wesleyan Church in Amherst, has witnessed some of the manifestations. He
saw, among other strange things, a bucket of cold water become agitated,
and to all appearances boil, while standing on the kitchen table.

As soon as people in the village found that such eminent men as Dr.
Clay, Dr. Caritte and Rev. Dr. Temple took an interest in the case, it
became quite fashionable for people in the village to call at Dan's
little cottage to see Esther Cox and witness the wonderful
manifestations. While the house was filled with visitors, large crowds
often stood outside unable to gain admittance. On several occasions the
village police force had to be called out to keep order, so anxious were
people to see and hear for themselves.

Many believed and still believe the whole affair a fraud, and others say
that Esther mesmerizes people, and they think they hear and see things
which never have an existence. Dr. Nathan Tupper is of this belief,
although he has never witnessed a single manifestation.

Dr. Caritte, who continued to be one of the daily callers at the
cottage, would have a theory one day that would seem to account for the
manifestations he had witnessed, and the next day something wonderful
would occur and upset his latest theory completely, so that he finally
gave up in despair and became simply a passive spectator. Things went on
in this way until December, when Esther was taken ill with diphtheria,
and confined to her bed for about two weeks, during which time the
manifestations ceased entirely. After she had recovered from her
illness, she went to Sackville, N.B., to visit her other married sister,
Mrs. John Snowden, remaining at her house for about two weeks. While
there she was entirely free from the manifestations.

On returning to Dan's cottage the most startling part of the case was
developed. One night while in bed with her sister Jane in another room,
her room having been changed to see if that would put a stop to the
affair, she told her sister that she could hear a voice saying to her
that the house was to be set on fire that night by a ghost. The voice
also said that it had once lived on the earth, but had been dead for
some years. The members of the household were called in at once, and
told what had been said. They only laughed and remarked that no such
thing as that could take place, because there were no ghosts. Dr. Clay
had said it was all electricity. "And," added Dan, "electricity can't
set the house on fire unless it comes from a cloud in the form of
lightning." As they were talking the matter over, to the amazement of
all present, a lighted match fell from the ceiling to the bed, and would
have set it on fire had not Jane put it out instantly. During the next
ten minutes, eight or ten lighted matches fell on the bed and about the
room, but were all extinguished before any harm could be done. In the
course of the night the loud knockings commenced. The family could now
all converse with the invisible power in this way. It would knock once
for a negative answer, and three times for an answer in the affirmative,
giving two knocks when in doubt about a reply. Dan asked if the house
would be set on fire, and the reply was three loud knocks on the floor,
meaning yes; and a fire was started about five minutes afterwards. The
ghost took a dress belonging to Esther that was hanging on a nail in the
wall near the door, rolled it up, and, before any of the persons in the
room could remove it from under the bed, where the ghost had placed it
before their very eyes, it was all in a blaze. It was extinguished,
however, without being much injured by the fire. The next morning all
was consternation in the cottage. Dan and Olive were afraid that the
ghost would start a fire in some inaccessible place and burn the house
down. They were both convinced that it really was a ghost, "for" said
Olive, "nothing but the devil or a ghost with evil designs, could do so
terrible a thing as start a fire in a cottage at the dead of night."

Dr. Clay's theory might be true, but it was not clear to them how
electricity could go about a house gifted with the cunning of a fiend.
"It is true," said Dan, "that lightning often sets fire to houses and
barns, but it has never yet been known to roam about a man's house, as
this strange power does. And as Esther can hear it speak, and it does
whatever it says it will, why I believe it to be a ghost, or else the
devil." While Olive was churning in the kitchen one morning about three
days after the fire under the bed, she noticed smoke coming from the
cellar. Esther was seated in the dining room when Olive first saw the
smoke, and had been seated there for the last hour, previous to which
she had been in the kitchen assisting her sister to wash the breakfast
dishes as was her custom. On seeing the smoke, both she and Esther were
for the moment utterly paralyzed with fear. What they so dreaded had at
last come to pass. The house was evidently on fire, and that fire set by
a devilish ghost. What was to be done? Olive was the first to recover
from the shock. Seizing the bucket of drinking water, always kept
standing on the kitchen table, she rushed down the cellar stairs, and
was horrified at the sight which burst upon her view. There in the far
corner of the cellar was a barrel of shavings blazing almost to the
floor above. In the meantime Esther had reached the cellar, and stood
looking at the crackling flames in blank astonishment. The water Olive
had poured into the barrel was not enough to quench the flames, for in
the excitement of the moment she had spilled more than half of it on her
way down. What was to be done? The house would catch and probably be
burned to the ground, and they would be rendered homeless.

"Oh! if Dan were at home, he could put it out," Olive managed to
articulate, for both she and Esther were nearly suffocated with the
dense black smoke with which the cellar was filled, and now the barrel
itself had caught. The cellar was very small, and everything in it would
soon be blazing unless the fire could be extinguished at once.

"Oh! what shall we do," cried Esther, "what shall we do?"

"Run out in the street and cry fire as loud as you can. Come, let's run
at once or the whole house will burn down," exclaimed Olive, by this
time wild with fear.

So, both she and Esther ran up stairs and out into the street, crying
"fire! fire!" Of course their cries aroused the whole neighborhood. At
the moment a gentleman, a stranger in the village, who happened to be
passing, instantly threw off his coat, rushed into the cottage, picked
up a mat from the dining room floor, and was down in the cellar in a
second. He put the fire entirely out, and then, without waiting to be
thanked, walked out of the cottage and was soon lost to view in the
distance; and, what is remarkably strange, nobody knows who he was or
whence he came, for from that day he has not been seen.

The news of the fire which the ghost had set in Dan's cellar soon
travelled all over the country and created a great deal of curiosity.
People who had set the whole affair down as a fraud began to think that
perhaps it was all true after all, for certainly no young girl could set
fire to a barrel of shavings in the cellar and be at that instant in
another part of the house, under the watchful eye of an older sister,
who was continually at her side. The fact that both the little boys were
out in the front yard at the time the fire was kindled, and consequently
could not have had anything to do with setting it, was also calculated
to throw an air of mystery around the whole affair.

The family believed that it had been started by the ghost. The fire
marshals of the village seemed to be of the opinion that Esther set both
fires herself; the villagers held various opinions. Dr. Nathan Tupper,
suggested that if a good raw hide whip were laid over her back by a
strong arm, the manifestations would cease at once. Fortunately for
Esther, no one had the right or power to beat her as if she were a
slave, and so the mystery still remained unsolved.

For the next week manifestations continued to take place daily and were
as powerful as ever. The excitement in Amherst was intense. If the
cottage in which Dan lived should catch fire when the wind was blowing
from the bay, the fire would spread, and if the wind was favorable for
such a terrible calamity, the whole village would soon be reduced to
ashes.

As if to pile horror upon horror, one night, as Esther and the entire
family were seated in the parlor, the ghost appeared. Esther started to
her feet and seemed for the moment paralyzed with terror. In a second or
two, however, she recovered her self-possession, and pointing with a
trembling hand to a distant corner of the room, exclaimed in a hoarse
and broken voice:

"Look there! Look there! My _God_, it is the ghost! Don't you all see
him? There he stands all in grey; see how his eyes are glaring at me and
he laughs when he says I must leave the house to-night or he will start
a fire in the loft under the roof and burn us all to death. Oh, what
shall I do, where shall I go; the ground is covered with snow--and yet I
cannot remain here, for he will do what he threatens; he always does."

"Oh, I wish I were dead." After this exclamation, she fell to the floor
and burst into an agony of grief. "Well," said Dan, after lifting her
up, "Something will have to be done, and quickly, too. The wind is
blowing hard to-night, and if the ghost does as he threatens, the house
will burn down sure, and perhaps the whole village. You must go, Esther.
Remember, I don't turn you out; it is this devil of a ghost who drives
you from your home."

They all knew none of the neighbors would shelter Esther, because they
all feared the ghost. What was to be done? Heaven only knew. It suddenly
occurred to Dan that John White would perhaps give her shelter, for he
had always taken a deep interest in the manifestations, and had often
expressed pity for the unhappy girl. So Dan, after putting on his heavy
coat--for it was snowing fast, and the night was intensely cold--went to
White's house. After knocking for some time, the door was opened by John
White himself. He looked at Dan a moment in amazement, and then
exclaimed in an inquiring tone:

"What's the matter, Teed? Has the house burned to the ground or has the
girl burst all to pieces?"

Dan explained his mission in a few words. When he had finished, White
thought a moment, and then said:

"Wait until I ask my wife; if she says yes, all right, you may bring her
here to-night." He asked his wife, and fortunately for the miserable
girl, she said "yes," and that very night Esther Cox changed her home.




Chapter IV.

THE WALKING OF THE GHOST.


When John White took Esther to his house to reside, he performed a
charitable deed, which no man in the village but himself had the heart
to do. Both he and his good wife showed, by the kindness with which they
treated the poor unhappy girl, that Heaven had at least inspired two
hearts with that greatest of all virtues--_Charity_.

It was now January, 1879,--just four months since the manifestations
first commenced. Esther had been at White's residence for two weeks, and
had not seen anything of the ghost. She had improved very much in that
short time, her nervousness having almost subsided, and she was
contented and happy. Mrs. White, who found her of great assistance in
the house, had become much attached to the girl, and treated her with
the same kindness that she did her own children.

Towards the end of the third week her old enemy--the ghost--returned.

While Esther was scrubbing the hall at her new home, she was astonished
to see her scrubbing brush disappear from her hand. When the ghost told
her that he had taken it, she became much alarmed and screamed for Mrs.
White, who, with her daughter Mary, searched the hall for it in vain.
After they had abandoned their search, to the great astonishment of all,
the brush fell from the ceiling--just grazing Esther's head in its fall.
Here was a new manifestation of the ghostly power. He was able to take a
solid substance from this material world of ours, and render it
invisible by taking it into his mysterious state of existence; and, if
he could take one object why not another; if a brush, why not a broom?
But why speculate on so great a mystery? The ghost did it, and as we
must draw the line somewhere, it is better to draw it here than to allow
our minds to become dazed by such fellows as ghosts. Many other
remarkable manifestations continued to take place almost daily for the
next two weeks. The ghost could now tell how much money people had in
their pockets, both by knocking and by telling Esther. He would answer
any question asked in the above mentioned manner, and behaved himself
very well indeed until the end of the sixth week, when his true devilish
nature broke out again. He commenced setting fires about the house, and
walking so that he could be heard distinctly. Of course John White would
not run the risk of having his house burned down. So he persuaded Esther
to remain during the day in his dining saloon, which stands opposite the
well known book store of G.G. Bird, on the principal street.

While standing behind the counter in the dining saloon, also while she
worked in the adjoining kitchen, many new and wonderful things were
witnessed by the inhabitants of Amherst and by strangers from a
distance, and many plans were tried to prevent the manifestations. Among
others, some one suggested that if she could stand on glass they would
cease. So pieces of glass were put into her shoes, but as their presence
caused her head to ache and her nose to bleed, without stopping the
manifestations, the idea was abandoned.

One morning the door of the large stove in the kitchen adjoining the
saloon was opened and shut by the ghost, much to the annoyance of Mr.
White, who with an old axe handle so braced the door that it could not
be moved by any known mundane power, unless the axe handle was first
removed. A moment afterwards, however, the ghost, who seemed never to
leave Esther's presence while she was in the saloon, lifted the door off
its hinges, removed the axe handle from the position in which it had
been placed, and, after throwing them some distance into the air, let
both fall to the floor with a tremendous crash. Mr. White was speechless
with astonishment, and immediately called in Mr. W.H. Rogers, Inspector
of Fisheries for Nova Scotia. After bracing the door as before, the same
wonderful manifestation was repeated, in the presence of Mr. Rogers. On
another occasion, a clasp-knife belonging to little Fred, Mr. White's
son, was taken from his hand by the ghost, who instantly stabbed Esther
in the back with it, leaving the knife sticking in the wound, which bled
profusely. Fred, after drawing the knife from the wound, wiped it,
closed it and put it in his pocket. The ghost took it from his pocket,
and in a second stuck it in the same wound. Fred again obtained
possession of the knife, and this time hid it so that it could not be
found, even by a ghost.

There is something still more remarkable, however, about the following
manifestation: Some person tried the experiment of placing three or four
large iron spikes on Esther's lap while she was seated in the Dining
Saloon. To the astonishment of everybody, the spikes were not removed by
the ghost, but instead, became too hot to be handled with comfort, and a
second afterwards were thrown by the ghost to the far end of the saloon,
a distance of twenty feet.

During her stay at the saloon the ghost commenced to move the furniture
about in the broad daylight. On one occasion a large box, weighing fifty
pounds, moved was a distance of fifteen feet without the slightest
visible cause. The very loud knocking commenced again and was heard by
crowds of people, the saloon being continually filled with visitors.
Among other well known inhabitants of Amherst who saw the wonders at
this period, I may mention William Hillson, Daniel Morrison, Robt.
Hutchinson, who is John White's son-in-law, and J. Albert Black, Esq.,
editor of the _Amherst Gazette_.

Towards the latter part of March, Esther went to Saint John, New
Brunswick, and while there was the guest of Captain James Beck, and
remained at his house for three weeks under the protection of his wife.
Her case was investigated by a party of gentlemen, well known in Saint
John as men whose minds have a scientific turn. Doctor Alward, Mr. Amos
Fales, Mr. Alex. Christie, Mr. Ritchie, and many others witnessed the
manifestations, and talked with the ghost by the aid of the knocks on
the wall and furniture, and, strange to relate, other ghosts came and
conversed also; among them one who said his name was Peter Cox, and
another who gave the name of Maggie Fisher. All claimed to have lived on
the earth before they entered the land of ghosts, but none were
apparently as strong and healthy as the old original fire fiend of the
cottage, who now gave the name of Bob Nickle, and said that when he
lived on the earth he had been a shoemaker. The ghost who called himself
Peter Cox, claimed to be a relation of Esther's, and said he had been in
ghost land about forty years; he was a quiet old fellow, and did all he
could to prevent Bob Nickle and Maggie Fisher from breaking the articles
which they threw, and from using profane language, a habit in which
_they_ were fond of indulging.

Dr. Alward and his scientific friends also conversed with the ghosts by
calling over the alphabet, the ghosts knocking at the correct letters,
and in that way long communications were spelled out to the satisfaction
of those present.

After remaining in Saint John about three weeks, Esther returned to
Amherst, and accepted an invitation to visit Mr. and Mrs. Van Amburgh,
who reside about three miles from the village. She remained eight weeks
with them, during which period the ghosts allowed her to enjoy the calm
repose of a life in the woods, the Van Amburgh farm being literally
situated in the woods.

At the expiration of the eighth week she returned to Amherst, and went
back to Dan's cottage to reside, being employed during the day in
White's Dining Saloon. The manifestations soon commenced again, and were
as powerful as when the author commenced his investigation of the case.




CHAPTER V.

THE AUTHOR AND THE GHOSTS.


I closed my engagement with the Dramatic Company of which I was a
member, in Newfoundland, and went to Amherst, to expose, if possible,
Esther Cox, the great Amherst Mystery.

Where occasion requires allusion to myself, I shall simply say the
author.

At seven o'clock on the morning of June 21st, 1879, as the sun was
shining brightly, and the cool breeze was blowing from the bay, the
author entered the haunted house. After placing his umbrella in a corner
of the dining room, and his satchel on the table, he seated himself in
one of the easy chairs to await results. Esther and Olive were present.
He had been in the room about five minutes when, to his great
astonishment, his umbrella was thrown a distance of fifteen feet, going
over his head in its flight. At the same instant a large carving knife
came jumping over the girl's head, and fell near him. Not at all pleased
with this kind of a reception on the part of the ghosts, he left the
room and went into the parlor, taking his satchel with him, and there
sat down paralyzed with wonder and astonishment. He had been seated only
a moment when his satchel was thrown a distance of ten feet. At the same
instant a large chair came flying across the room striking the one on
which he was seated, nearly knocking it from under him. It suddenly
occurred to him that he would take a walk, during which he could admire
the beauties of the village.

On his return to the cottage, the ghosts commenced their deviltry again
with redoubled violence. He had no sooner entered the house than all the
chairs in the parlor--and there were seven by actual count--fell over.
Concluding not to remain in that room, he went to the dining room, when
the chairs in that, his favorite room in every house, went through the
same performance. Feeling hungry, not yet having had his breakfast, he
sat down to a good substantial meal, Esther sitting directly opposite.
After pouring out his coffee, she handed it to him with the remark, "Oh,
you will soon get used to them; I don't think they like you." "No," he
replied, "I do not think they do either. In fact, I am satisfied they do
not; but, having come here to investigate, I shall remain until they
drive me from the house." While eating breakfast the ghosts commenced to
hammer on the table. By the system in use by the family when conversing
with them, he carried on a long conversation, they answering by knocks
on the bottom of the table. Before entering into the conversation,
however, he sat so that Esther's hands and feet were in full view. The
ghosts told the number of his watch, also the dates of coins in his
pocket, and beat correct time when he whistled the tune of "Yankee
Doodle." Chairs continued to fall over until dinner, during which there
was a slight cessation of manifestations.

After dinner, the author lay down upon the parlor sofa to take a nap, as
is his custom in the afternoon. Esther came into the room for a
newspaper. He watched her very closely, keeping one eye open and the one
next her shut, so that she would think he was asleep. While watching her
intently to see that she did not throw anything herself, a large glass
paper weight, weighing fully a pound, came whizzing through the air from
the far corner of the room, where it had been on a shelf, a distance of
fully fifteen feet from the sofa. Fortunately for the author, instead of
striking his head, which was evidently the intention of the ghost who
threw it, it struck the arm of the sofa with great force, rebounding to
a chair, upon which it remained after it had spun around for a second
or two. Being very anxious to witness the manifestations, he requested
Esther to remain in the room, which she did. After seating herself in
the rocking chair, little George came into the room, when she placed the
little fellow on her lap and sang to him. As the author lay there
watching her, one of the child's copper-toed shoes was taken off by a
ghost and thrown at him with great force, striking his head. The place
struck was very sore for three or four days. The balance of the day
passed quietly away. Evening came, and the author had a good night's
rest in the haunted house of which he had heard so much. The next day
being Sunday, everything was peaceful in the cottage, though why the
ghosts should respect the Sabbath the author has never been able to
ascertain; however they always remain quiet on that day. On Monday
morning the ghosts commenced their mad pranks again, and seemed ready
for anything. At breakfast, the lid of the stone-china sugar bowl
disappeared from the table, and, in about ten minutes, fell from the
ceiling. After breakfast; over went the table; then the chairs all fell
over, and several large mats were pitched about the room. The author
immediately left the room and went into the parlor, when, to his
astonishment, a flower pot containing a large plant in full bloom was
taken from its place in the bay window and set down in the middle of the
room and a large tin can filled with water was brought from the kitchen
and placed beside it. During the afternoon a large inkstand and two
empty bottles were thrown at him. The ghosts also undressed little
George, and, as if to make a final climax to the day's performance, Bob,
the head ghost, started a small bon-fire up stairs, and he and the other
ghosts piled all the chairs in the parlor one on top of the other, until
they made a pile about six feet in height, when, as if in sport, they
pulled out those underneath, letting all the others fall to the floor
with a crash.

On Tuesday morning when the author took his seat at the breakfast table,
he placed the sugar bowl lid beside his plate, so that he might have his
eyes on it. In a second it disappeared and fell, in exactly eight
minutes by the clock, from the ceiling, a distance of fully twenty feet
from the table. The ghosts got under the table, as on the previous
morning, and were so obliging as to produce any sounds called for, such
as an exact imitation of the sawing of wood, of drumming and of washing
on a wash board. During the morning several knives were thrown at him; a
large crock of salt was taken from the kitchen dresser and placed on the
dining room table; the tea kettle was taken from the stove by one of the
ghosts and placed out in the yard, as was also the beefsteak, pan and
all, which was frying on the stove; and, after dinner, the table was
upset. During the afternoon, while in the parlor, the author made the
acquaintance of all the ghosts,--Bob Nickle, the chief ghost; Maggie
Fisher, another ghost almost as bad as Bob; Peter Cox, a quiet old
fellow of very little use as a ghost, because he never tries to break
chairs, etc.; Mary Fisher, (who says she is Maggie's sister) Jane Nickle
and Eliza McNeal. The three last are "no good" as ghosts, as all they do
is stalk about the house and occasionally upset something. As there are
only six ghosts all told, and they were all present, the author asked
them numerous questions, all of which were answered by loud knocks on
the floor or on the wall, just as he requested--all seeming anxious to
converse. The first question the author asked was:

"Have you all lived on the earth?"

A.--"Yes."

Q.--"Have you seen God?"

A.--"No."

Q.--"Are you in heaven?"

A.--"No."

Q.--"Are you in hell?"

A.--"Yes."

Q.--"Have you seen the devil?"

A.--very loud--"Yes."

Many other questions were answered, but the answers are not worth
repeating.

At the conclusion of the interview, one of the ghosts threw the author's
bottle of ink from the table to the floor, spilling the contents on the
carpet.

The next day as the author and Esther were entering the parlor, both saw
a chair fall over and instantly jump up again. Neither the author nor
Esther were within five feet of the chair at the time.

During the whole of the next day the ghosts stuck pins into Esther's
person. These pins appeared to come out of the air and the author pulled
about thirty from various parts of her body during the day. In the
afternoon the family cat was thrown a distance of five feet by one of
the ghosts, and almost had a fit from fright. She remained in the yard
for the balance of the day, and ever afterwards while in the house
seemed to be on the lookout for ghosts; possibly she saw and heard them
on several occasions afterwards, for her tail often became quite large,
as cats' tails always do when they are frightened or angry, after which
she would leave the house in a hurry. The author saw Esther coming down
stairs late in the afternoon, and when she had reached the hall a chair
from his room came down after her. The only other person in the cottage
at the time was Olive, and she was at that instant in the kitchen.

On June 26th, two or three matches fell from the ceiling at the author's
feet. Being a great smoker, he requested the ghosts to throw down a few
more, which they did. He would simply say, "Bob, I would like a few
matches, if you please." When down they would come from the ceiling.
Forty-five were thrown during the day, and on another day during the
afternoon forty-nine fell to the floor.

It must be remembered that all the manifestations witnessed by the
author took place in the broad light of day, and that the only other
persons present were the various members of the family.

On June 28th, the sound of a trumpet was heard by the author and all the
family. It continued to be blown about the house from early morning
until late in the evening. The sound was very distinct and was at times
close to their ears. Late in the evening "Bob" let the trumpet fall in
one of the rooms. It is composed of some metal very similar to German
silver, and is now in the possession of the author, who intends to place
it in a museum on his return to the United States. Where the ghosts got
it no one knows. It had never been seen in Amherst, so far as had been
ascertainable, until it fell upon the floor, and its true origin will
doubtless always remain a mystery.

It is hardly necessary that the author should weary the reader with a
minute account of the manifestations produced by these ghosts during his
residence of six weeks in the haunted house, he could easily fill a book
containing twice the number of pages that this one does, with an account
of what was done by the ghosts alone, without mentioning the name of a
single living individual except Esther Cox; but I suppose the reader, by
this time, is ready to cry "_quantum sufficit_." So by referring to a
few more facts, he will end this chapter.

One afternoon, while Esther was out walking, she called on Rev. R.A.
Temple. During the visit he prayed with her, and also advised her to
pray for herself. On her return to the cottage, one of the ghosts,
either Bob or Maggie, cut her on the head with an old bone from the
yard, and a moment afterwards stabbed her in the face with a fork.

While the author lived in the house, scarcely a day passed that some
article was not thrown by the ghosts. They would often steal small
articles and keep them secreted--Heavens only knows where--for days at a
time, and then unexpectedly let them fall in one of the rooms, to the
amazement of every one. In that way, shoes and stockings, knives, forks
and other articles too numerous to mention would be missed, sometimes
for weeks, and on one occasion some copper coins were taken from Dan's
pocket and placed upon the author's knee.

It was a common thing for the ghosts to throw knives at the author, but
fortunately they were all dull and he was never cut; he was, however,
often struck by small articles, never sufficiently hard, however, to
draw blood. During his stay in the house, Esther often went into a state
very similar to the mesmeric sleep, during which she talked with people
invisible to all present; among others, her dead mother. On coming out
of this strange state she always said she had been to heaven among the
angels.

On several occasions, Bob, the head ghost, tormented her so at night
that it was with difficulty she could remain in bed. On one particular
occasion the author was called up by Dan at midnight so that he might
behold for himself what was going on. After dressing, he went into
Esther's room, and was horrified by the sight which met his gaze. There,
upon the bed, lay the poor, unhappy girl swollen to an enormous size,
her body moving about the bed as if Beelzebub himself were in her, while
between her gasps for breath she exclaimed in agonizing sobs: "Oh, my
God, I wish I were dead! I wish I were dead!"

"Oh, don't say that, Esther," plead Olive, "don't say that."

"Now, Mr. Hubbell," said Jane to the author, "you see how much she
suffers."

"Yes, I see," said Hubbell, "but let us endeavor to hold her, so that
this fiend cannot move her about the bed, and then, perhaps, she will
not suffer so much." So Dan and himself tried to hold her so that she
could not be moved, but in vain.

"Well," said Hubbell, "one ghost is certainly stronger than two men. Are
you sure nothing can be done to relieve her?"

"No," replied Olive, "Dr. Caritte has tried everything without affording
her the slightest relief. Medicine has no more effect on her than
water."

Jane, Olive, Dan and the author remained up with her for about three
hours, during which time she continued to move about the bed, after
which the ghost left her and she sank from sheer exhaustion into a state
of lethargy. She had several attacks of this kind during the author's
residence in the cottage, and on one occasion she was seen by Mr. G.G.
Bird, Mr. Jas. P. Dunlap, Mr. Amos Purdy and several ladies; on another
occasion by Dr. E.D. McLean, Mr. Fowler and Mr. Sleep.

Towards the latter part of July the manifestations became so powerful
that it was no longer safe to have Esther in the house. Fires were
continually being started, the walls were being broken by chairs, the
bed clothes pulled off in the day time, heavy sofas turned upside down,
knives and forks thrown with such force that they would stick into
doors, food disappeared from the table, finger marks became visible in
the butter, and, worse than all, strange voices could be heard calling
the inmates by name in the broad light of day. This was too much; if the
ghosts continued to gain in strength they would take possession of the
house and all in it, for there were six ghosts, and only five persons in
the flesh all told, as follows: Dan, Olive, Jane, Esther and the
author, not, of course, counting the two children--William Cox and John
Teed having left the house before Esther went to St. John, literally
driven away by ghosts.

There was but one remedy, and that was that Esther Cox should leave the
house even though her sisters loved her dearly. Simple hearted village
maiden! Fate decreed that she should be torn from their home, but not
from their hearts for the simple reason that her room was far more
agreeable than her company.

So one morning, after packing up all her worldly possessions, she kissed
the little boys, embraced her sisters, shook hands with the rest, bade
them all farewell, and departed never to return.




CHAPTER VI.

CONCLUSION.


Esther is living with her friends the Van Amburgh's, on their farm in
the woods. The ghosts do not torment her now. With the Van Amburghs she
has a quiet, peaceful home. One thing is certain, if she returned to
Dan's cottage manifestations would, in a short time, become as powerful
as ever, and Heaven only knows where the matter would end.

The author went to see her at the farm, On August 1st, 1879, and found
her making a patch-work quilt, on which she stopped working every few
minutes to play with the little children. She informed him that she read
her Bible regularly every day, and was contented and happy. Before
departing he advised her to pray earnestly that she might never again,
be possessed by devils. She promised to take his advice. So hoping that
her prayers would be answered, he bade her farewell forever.

In Dan's little cottage all is now harmony and peace. Pretty Jane still
tends her plants with loving care. Olive works as hard as ever, and so
does honest Dan. And there may they reside for years to come, enjoying
the blessings which the virtuous always receive from the hands of
Providence.

Reader, a word. This account of the "Haunted House," in which Esther Cox
suffered so much, and the author had such a remarkable experience, is no
fanciful creation of the imagination, but really what it is claimed to
be,--"A True Ghost Story."


THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's notes:

   Obvious spelling errors repaired.
   Quotation marks normalised.
   All other printing errors retained.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAUNTED HOUSE***


******* This file should be named 16975.txt or 16975.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/9/7/16975



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

