Project Gutenberg's The Boy Scouts Book of Campfire Stories, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Boy Scouts Book of Campfire Stories

Author: Various

Editor: Franklin K. Mathiews

Release Date: August 29, 2008 [EBook #26475]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPFIRE STORIES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








THE BOY SCOUTS BOOK OF CAMPFIRE STORIES

[Illustration: THERE, STANDING KNEE-DEEP IN THE WATER, WAS THE BIGGEST
AND BLACKEST MOOSE IN THE WORLD]




THE BOY SCOUTS BOOK OF CAMPFIRE STORIES

          EDITED
          WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

BY

FRANKLIN K. MATHIEWS

          CHIEF SCOUT LIBRARIAN,
          BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA

PUBLISHED FOR

THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA

[Illustration]

          D. APPLETON-CENTURY COMPANY
          INCORPORATED
          NEW YORK             1933



          COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY

          D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

          All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof,
          must not be reproduced in any form without
          permission of the publishers.

          PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION

THE campfire for ages has been the place of council and friendship and
story-telling. The mystic glow of the fire quickens the mind, warms the
heart, awakens memories of happy, glowing tales that fairly leap to the
lips. The Boy Scouts of America has incorporated the "campfire" in its
program for council and friendship and story-telling. In one volume, the
_Boy Scouts Book of Campfire Stories_ makes available to scoutmasters
and other leaders a goodly number of stories worthy of their attention,
and when well told likely to arrest and hold the interest of boys in
their early teens, when "stirs the blood--to bubble in the veins."

At this time, when the boy is growing so rapidly in brain and body, he
can have no better teacher than some mighty woodsman. Now should be
presented to him stirring stories of the adventurous lives of men who
live in and love the out-of-doors. Says Professor George Walter Fiske:
"Let him emulate savage woodcraft; the woodsman's keen, practiced
vision; his steadiness of nerve; his contempt for pain, hardship and the
weather; his power of endurance, his observation and heightened senses;
his delight in out-of-door sports and joys and unfettered happiness with
untroubled sleep under the stars; his calmness, self-control, emotional
steadiness; his utter faithfulness in friendships; his honesty, his
personal bravery."

The Editor likes to think that quite a few of the stories found in the
_Boy Scouts Book of Campfire Stories_ present companions for the mind
of this hardy sort, and hopes, whether boys read or are told these
stories, they will prove to be such as exalt and inspire while they
thrill and entertain.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                            PAGE
        INTRODUCTION                                                    v
     I. SILVERHORNS                                  _Henry van Dyke_   1
    II. WILD HORSE HUNTER                                 _Zane Grey_  21
   III. HYDROPHOBIC SKUNK                             _Irvin S. Cobb_  90
    IV. THE OLE VIRGINIA                       _Stewart Edward White_ 100
     V. THE WEIGHT OF OBLIGATION                          _Rex Beach_ 108
    VI. THAT SPOT                                       _Jack London_ 140
   VII. WHEN LINCOLN LICKED A BULLY                _Irving Bacheller_ 155
  VIII. THE END OF THE TRAIL                    _Clarence E. Mulford_ 180
    IX. DEY AIN'T NO GHOSTS                     _Ellis Parker Butler_ 201
     X. THE NIGHT OPERATOR                         _Frank L. Packard_ 218
    XI. CHRISTMAS EVE IN A LUMBER CAMP                 _Ralph Connor_ 258
   XII. THE STORY THAT THE KEG TOLD ME _Adirondack (W. H. H.) Murray_ 275




[Illustration]




I.--Silverhorns[1]

_By Henry van Dyke_


THE railway station of Bathurst, New Brunswick, did not look
particularly merry at two o'clock of a late September morning. There was
an easterly haze driving in from the Baie des Chaleurs and the darkness
was so saturated with chilly moisture that an honest downpour of rain
would have been a relief. Two or three depressed and somnolent travelers
yawned in the waiting room, which smelled horribly of smoky lamps. The
telegraph instrument in the ticket office clicked spasmodically for a
minute, and then relapsed into a gloomy silence. The imperturbable
station master was tipped back against the wall in a wooden armchair,
with his feet on the table, and his mind sunk in an old Christmas number
of the _Cowboy Magazine_. The express agent, in the baggage-room, was
going over his last week's waybills and accounts by the light of a
lantern, trying to locate an error, and sighing profanely to himself as
he failed to find it. A wooden trunk tied with rope, a couple of dingy
canvas bags, a long box marked "Fresh Fish! Rush!" and two large leather
portmanteaus with brass fittings were piled on the luggage truck at the
far end of the platform; and beside the door of the waiting room,
sheltered by the overhanging eaves, was a neat traveling bag, with a gun
case and a rod case leaning against the wall. The wet rails glittered
dimly northward and southward away into the night. A few blurred lights
glimmered from the village across the bridge.

Dudley Hemenway had observed all these features of the landscape with
silent dissatisfaction, as he smoked steadily up and down the platform,
waiting for the Maritime Express. It is usually irritating to arrive at
the station on time for a train on the Intercolonial Railway. The
arrangement is seldom mutual; and sometimes yesterday's train does not
come along until to-morrow afternoon. Moreover, Hemenway was inwardly
discontented with the fact that he was coming out of the woods instead
of going in. "Coming out" always made him a little unhappy, whether his
expedition had been successful or not. He did not like the thought that
it was all over; and he had the very bad habit, at such times, of
looking ahead and computing the slowly lessening number of chances that
were left to him.

"Sixty odd years--I may get to be that old and keep my shooting sight,"
he said to himself. "That would give me a couple of dozen more camping
trips. It's a short allowance. I wonder if any of them will be more
lucky than this one. This makes the seventh year I've tried to get a
moose; and the odd trick has gone against me every time."

He tossed away the end of his cigar, which made a little trail of sparks
as it rolled along the sopping platform, and turned to look in through
the window of the ticket office. Something in the agent's attitude of
literary absorption aggravated him. He went round to the door and opened
it.

"Don't you know or care when this train is coming?"

"Nope," said the man placidly.

"Well, when? What's the matter with her? When is she due?"

"Doo twenty minits ago," said the man. "Forty minits late down to
Moocastle. Git here quatter to three, ef nothin' more happens."

"But what has happened? What's wrong with the beastly old road, anyhow?"

"Freight car skipped the track," said the man, "up to Charlo. Everythin'
hung up an' kinder goin' slow till they git the line clear. Dunno
nothin' more."

With this conclusive statement the agent seemed to disclaim all
responsibility for the future of impatient travelers, and dropped his
mind back into the magazine again. Hemenway lit another cigar and went
into the baggage room to smoke with the expressman. It was nearly three
o'clock when they heard the far-off shriek of the whistle sounding up
from the south; then, after an interval, the puffing of the engine on
the upgrade; then the faint ringing of the rails, the increasing clatter
of the train, and the blazing headlight of the locomotive swept slowly
through the darkness, past the platform. The engineer was leaning on one
arm, with his head out of the cab window, and Hemenway nodded as he
passed and hurried into the ticket office, where the ticktack of a
conversation by telegraph was soon under way. The black porter of the
Pullman car was looking out from the vestibule, and when he saw Hemenway
his sleepy face broadened into a grin reminiscent of many generous tips.

"Howdy, Mr. Hennigray," he cried; "glad to see yo' ag'in, sah! I got yo'
section all right, sah! Lemme take yo' things, sah! Train gwine to stop
hy'eh fo' some time yet, I reckon."

"Well, Charles," said Hemenway, "you take my things and put them in the
car. Careful with that gun now! The Lord only knows how much time this
train's going to lose. I'm going ahead to see the engineer."

Angus McLeod was a grizzle-bearded Scotchman who had run a locomotive on
the Intercolonial ever since the road was cut through the woods from New
Brunswick to Quebec. Every one who traveled often on that line knew him,
and all who knew him well enough to get below his rough crust, liked
him for his big heart.

"Hallo, McLeod," said Hemenway as he came up through the darkness, "is
that you?"

"It's nane else," answered the engineer as he stepped down from his cab
and shook hands warmly. "Hoo are ye, Dud, an' whaur hae ye been
murderin' the innocent beasties noo? Hae ye kilt yer moose yet? Ye've
been chasin' him these mony years."

"Not much murdering," replied Hemenway. "I had a queer trip this
time--away up the Nepisiguit, with old McDonald. You know him, don't
you?"

"Fine do I ken Rob McDonald, an' a guid mon he is. Hoo was it that ye
couldna slaughter stacks o' moose wi' him to help ye? Did ye see nane at
all?"

"Plenty, and one with the biggest horns in the world! But that's a long
story, and there's no time to tell it now."

"Time to burrn, Dud, nae fear o' it! 'Twill be an hour afore the line's
clear to Charlo an' they lat us oot o' this. Come awa' up into the cab,
mon, an' tell us yer tale. 'Tis couthy an' warm in the cab, an' I'm
willin' to leesten to yer bluidy advaintures."

So the two men clambered up into the engineer's seat. Hemenway gave
McLeod his longest and strongest cigar, and filled his own briar-wood
pipe. The rain was now pattering gently on the roof of the cab. The
engine hissed and sizzled patiently in the darkness. The fragrant smoke
curled steadily from the glowing tip of the cigar; but the pipe went out
half a dozen times while Hemenway was telling the story of Silverhorns.

"We went up the river to the big rock, just below Indian Falls. There we
made our main camp, intending to hunt on Forty-two Mile Brook. There's
quite a snarl of ponds and bogs at the head of it, and some burned hills
over to the west, and it's very good moose country.

"But some other party had been there before us, and we saw nothing on
the ponds, except two cow moose and a calf. Coming out the next morning
we got a fine deer on the old wood road--a beautiful head. But I have
plenty of deer heads already."

"Bonny creature!" said McLeod. "An' what did ye do wi' it, when ye had
murdered it?"

"Ate it, of course. I gave the head to Billy Boucher, the cook. He said
he could get ten dollars for it. The next evening we went to one of the
ponds again, and Injun Pete tried to 'call' a moose for me. But it was
no good. McDonald was disgusted with Pete's calling; said it sounded
like the bray of a wild ass of the wilderness. So the next day we gave
up calling and traveled the woods over toward the burned hills.

"In the afternoon McDonald found an enormous moose-track; he thought it
looked like a bull's track, though he wasn't quite positive. But then,
you know, a Scotchman never likes to commit himself, except about
theology or politics."

"Humph!" grunted McLeod in the darkness, showing that the strike had
counted.

"Well, we went on, following that track through the woods, for an hour
or two. It was a terrible country, I tell you: tamarack swamps, and
spruce thickets, and windfalls, and all kinds of misery. Presently we
came out on a bare rock on the burned hillside, and there, across a
ravine, we could see the animal lying down, just below the trunk of a
big dead spruce that had fallen. The beast's head and neck were hidden
by some bushes, but the fore shoulder and side were in clear view, about
two hundred and fifty yards away. McDonald seemed to be inclined to
think that it was a bull and that I ought to shoot. So I shot, and
knocked splinters out of the spruce log. We could see them fly. The
animal got up quickly, and looked at us for a moment, shaking her long
ears; then the huge unmitigated cow vamoosed into the brush. McDonald
remarked that it was 'a varra fortunate shot, almaist providaintial!'
And so it was; for if it had gone six inches lower, and the news gotten
out at Bathurst, it would have cost me a fine of two hundred dollars."

"Ye did weel, Dud," puffed McLeod; "varra weel indeed--for the coo!"

"After that," continued Hemenway, "of course my nerve was a little
shaken, and we went back to the main camp on the river, to rest over
Sunday. That was all right, wasn't it, Mac!"

"Aye!" replied McLeod, who was a strict member of the Presbyterian
church at Moncton. "That was surely a varra safe thing to do. Even a
hunter, I'm thinkin', wouldna like to be breakin' twa commandments in
the ane day--the foorth and the saxth!"

"Perhaps not. It's enough to break one, as you do once a fortnight when
you run your train into Riviere du Loup Sunday morning. How's that, you
old Calvinist?"

"Dudley, ma son," said the engineer, "dinna airgue a point that ye canna
understond. There's guid an' suffeecient reasons for the train. But
ye'll ne'er be claimin' that moose huntin' is a wark o' necessity or
maircy?"

"No, no, of course not; but then, you see, barring Sundays, we felt that
it was necessary to do all we could to get a moose, just for the sake of
our reputations. Billy, the cook, was particularly strong about it. He
said that an old woman in Bathurst, a kind of fortune teller, had told
him that he was going to have 'la bonne chance' on this trip. He wanted
to try his own mouth at 'calling.' He had never really done it before.
But he had been practicing all winter in imitation of a tame cow moose
that Johnny Moreau had, and he thought he could make the sound 'b'en
bon.' So he got the birch-bark horn and gave us a sample of his skill.
McDonald told me privately that it was 'nae sa bad; a deal better than
Pete's feckless bellow.' We agreed to leave the Indian to keep the camp
(after locking up the whisky flask in my bag), and take Billy with us on
Monday to 'call' at Hogan's Pond.

"It's a small bit of water, about three quarters of a mile long and four
hundred yards across, and four miles back from the river. There is no
trail to it, but a blazed line runs part of the way, and for the rest
you follow up the little brook that runs out of the pond. We stuck up
our shelter in a hollow on the brook, half a mile below the pond, so
that the smoke of our fire would not drift over the hunting ground, and
waited till five o'clock in the afternoon. Then we went up to the pond,
and took our position in a clump of birch trees on the edge of the open
meadow that runs round the east shore. Just at dark Billy began to call,
and it was beautiful. You know how it goes. Three short grunts, and then
a long ooooo-aaaa-ooooh, winding up with another grunt! It sounded
lonelier than a love-sick hippopotamus on the house top. It rolled and
echoed over the hills as if it would wake the dead.

"There was a fine moon shining, nearly full, and a few clouds floating
by. Billy called, and called, and called again. The air grew colder and
colder; light frost on the meadow grass; our teeth were chattering,
fingers numb.

"Then we heard a bull give a short bawl, away off to the southward.
Presently we could hear his horns knock against the trees, far up on
the hill. McDonald whispered, 'He's comin',' and Billy gave another
call.

"But it was another bull that answered, back of the north end of the
pond, and pretty soon we could hear him rapping along through the woods.
Then everything was still. 'Call agen,' says McDonald, and Billy called
again.

"This time the bawl came from another bull, on top of the western hill,
straight across the pond. It seemed to start up the other two bulls, and
we could hear all three of them thrashing along, as fast as they could
come, towards the pond. 'Call agen, a wee one,' says McDonald, trembling
with joy. And Billy called a little seducing call, with two grunts at
the end.

"Well, sir, at that, a cow and a calf came rushing down through the
brush not two hundred yards away from us, and the three bulls went
splash into the water, one at the south end, one at the north end, and
one on the west shore. 'Land,' whispers McDonald, 'it's a meenadgerie!'"

"Dud," said the engineer, getting down to open the furnace door a crack,
"this is mair than murder ye're comin' at; it's a buitchery--or else
it's juist a pack o' lees."

"I give you my word," said Hemenway, "it's all true as the catechism.
But let me go on. The cow and the calf only stayed in the water a few
minutes, and then ran back through the woods. But the three bulls went
sloshing around in the pond as if they were looking for something. We
could hear them, but we could not see any of them, for the sky had
clouded up, and they kept far away from us. Billy tried another short
call, but they did not come any nearer. McDonald whispered that he
thought the one in the south end might be the biggest, and he might be
feeding, and the two others might be young bulls, and they might be
keeping away because they were afraid of the big one. This seemed
reasonable; and I said that I was going to crawl around the meadow to
the south end. 'Keep near a tree,' says Mac; and I started.

"There was a deep trail, worn by animals, through the high grass; and in
this I crept along on my hands and knees. It was very wet and muddy. My
boots were full of cold water. After ten minutes I came to a little
point running out into the pond, and one young birch growing on it.
Under this I crawled, and rising up on my knees looked over the top of
the grass and bushes.

"There, in a shallow bay, standing knee-deep in the water, and rooting
up the lily stems with his long, pendulous nose, was the biggest and
blackest bull moose in the world. As he pulled the roots from the mud
and tossed up his dripping head I could see his horns--four and a half
feet across, if they were an inch, and the palms shining like tea trays
in the moonlight. I tell you, old Silverhorns was the most beautiful
monster I ever saw.

"But he was too far away to shoot by that dim light, so I left my birch
tree and crawled along toward the edge of the bay. A breath of wind must
have blown across me to him, for he lifted his head, sniffed, grunted,
came out of the water, and began to trot slowly along the trail which
led past me. I knelt on one knee and tried to take aim. A black cloud
came over the moon. I couldn't see either of the sights on the gun. But
when the bull came opposite to me, about fifty yards off, I blazed away
at a venture.

"He reared straight up on his hind legs--it looked as if he rose fifty
feet in the air--wheeled, and went walloping along the trail, around the
south end of the pond. In a minute he was lost in the woods. Good-by,
Silverhorns!"

"Ye tell it weel," said McLeod, reaching out for a fresh cigar. "Fegs!
Ah doot Sir Walter himsel' couldna impruve upon it. An, sae thot's the
way ye didna murder puir Seelverhorrns? It's a tale I'm joyfu' to be
hearin'."

"Wait a bit," Hemenway answered. "That's not the end, by a long shot.
There's worse to follow. The next morning we returned to the pond at
day-break, for McDonald thought I might have wounded the moose. We
searched the bushes and the woods where he went out very carefully,
looking for drops of blood on his trail."

"Bluid!" groaned the engineer. "Hech, mon, wouldna that come nigh to
mak' ye greet, to find the beast's red bluid splashed over the leaves,
and think o' him staggerin' on thro' the forest, drippin' the heart oot
o' him wi' every step?"

"But we didn't find any blood, you old sentimentalist. That shot in the
dark was a clear miss. We followed the trail by broken bushes and
footprints, for half a mile, and then came back to the pond and turned
to go down through the edge of the woods to the camp.

"It was just after sunrise. I was walking a few yards ahead, McDonald
next, and Billy last. Suddenly he looked around to the left, gave a low
whistle and dropped to the ground, pointing northward. Away at the head
of the pond, beyond the glitter of the sun on the water, the big
blackness of Silverhorns' head and body was pushing through the bushes,
dripping with dew.

"Each of us flopped down behind the nearest shrub as if we had been
playing squat tag. Billy had the birch-bark horn with him, and he gave a
low, short call. Silverhorns heard it, turned, and came parading slowly
down the western shore, now on the sand beach, now splashing through the
shallow water. We could see every motion and hear every sound. He
marched along as if he owned the earth, swinging his huge head from side
to side and grunting at each step.

"You see, we were just in the edge of the woods, strung along the south
end of the pond, Billy nearest the west shore, where the moose was
walking, McDonald next, and I last, perhaps fifteen yards farther to
the east. It was a fool arrangement, but we had no time to think about
it. McDonald whispered that I should wait until the moose came close to
us and stopped.

"So I waited. I could see him swagger along the sand and step out around
the fallen logs. The nearer he came the bigger his horns looked; each
palm was like an enormous silver fish fork with twenty prongs. Then he
went out of my sight for a minute as he passed around a little bay in
the southwest corner, getting nearer and nearer to Billy. But I could
still hear his steps distinctly--slosh, slosh, slosh--thud, thud, thud
(the grunting had stopped)--closer came the sound, until it was directly
behind the dense green branches of a fallen balsam tree, not twenty feet
away from Billy. Then suddenly the noise ceased. I could hear my own
heart pounding at my ribs, but nothing else. And of Silverhorns not hair
nor hide was visible. It looked as if he must be a Boojum, and had the
power to 'softly and silently vanish away.'

"Billy and Mac were beckoning to me fiercely and pointing to the green
balsam top. I gripped my rifle and started to creep toward them. A
little twig, about as thick as the tip of a fishing rod, cracked under
my knee. There was a terrible crash behind the balsam, a plunging
through the underbrush and a rattling among the branches, a lumbering
gallop up the hill through the forest, and Silverhorns was gone into the
invisible.

"He had stopped behind the tree because he smelled the grease on
Billy's boots. As he stood there, hesitating, Billy and Mac could see
his shoulder and his side through a gap in the branches--a dead-easy
shot. But so far as I was concerned, he might as well have been in
Alaska. I told you that the way we had placed ourselves was a fool
arrangement. But McDonald would not say anything about it, except to
express his conviction that it was not predestinated we should get that
moose."

"Ah dinna ken ould Rob had sae much theology aboot him," commented
McLeod. "But noo I'm thinkin' ye went back to yer main camp, an' lat
puir Seelverhorrns live oot his life?"

"Not much, did we! For now we knew that he wasn't badly frightened by
the adventure of the night before, and that we might get another chance
at him. In the afternoon it began to rain; and it poured for forty-eight
hours. We covered in our shelter before a smoky fire, and lived on short
rations of crackers and dried prunes--it was a hungry time."

"But wasna there slathers o' food at the main camp? Ony fule wad ken
enough to gae doon to the river an' tak' a guid fill-up."

"But that wasn't what we wanted. It was Silverhorns. Billy and I made
McDonald stay, and Thursday afternoon, when the clouds broke away, we
went back to the pond to have a last try at turning our luck.

"This time we took our positions with great care, among some small
spruces on a joint that ran out from the southern meadow. I was farthest
to the west; McDonald (who had also brought his gun) was next; Billy,
with the horn, was farthest away from the point where he thought the
moose would come out. So Billy began to call, very beautifully. The long
echoes went bellowing over the hills. The afternoon was still and the
setting sun shone through a light mist, like a ball of red gold.

"Fifteen minutes after sundown Silverhorns gave a loud bawl from the
western ridge and came crashing down the hill. He cleared the bushes two
or three hundred yards to our left with a leap, rushed into the pond,
and came wading around the south shore toward us. The bank here was
rather high, perhaps four feet above the water, and the mud below it was
deep, so that the moose sank in to his knees. I give you my word, as he
came along there was nothing visible to Mac and me except his ears and
his horns. Everything else was hidden below the bank.

"There were we behind our little spruce trees. And there was
Silverhorns, standing still now, right in front of us. And all that Mac
and I could see were those big ears and those magnificent antlers,
appearing and disappearing as he lifted and lowered his head. It was a
fearful situation. And there was Billy, with his birch-bark hooter,
forty yards below us--he could see the moose perfectly.

"I looked at Mac, and he looked at me. He whispered something about
predestination. Then Billy lifted his horn and made ready to give a
little soft grunt, to see if the moose wouldn't move along a bit, just
to oblige us. But as Billy drew in his breath, one of those fool flies
that are always blundering around a man's face flew straight down his
throat. Instead of a call he burst out with a furious, strangling fit of
coughing. The moose gave a snort, and a wild leap in the water, and
galloped away under the bank, the way he had come. Mac and I both fired
at his vanishing ears and horns, but of course----"

"All Aboooard!" The conductor's shout rang along the platform.

"Line's clear," exclaimed McLeod, rising. "Noo we'll be off! Wull ye
stay here wi' me, or gang awa' back to yer bed?"

"Here," answered Hemenway, not budging from his place on the bench.

The bell clanged, and the powerful machine puffed out on its flaring way
through the night. Faster and faster came the big explosive breaths,
until they blended in a long steady roar, and the train was sweeping
northward at forty miles an hour. The clouds had broken; the night had
grown colder; the gibbous moon gleamed over the vast and solitary
landscape. It was a different thing to Hemenway, riding in the cab of
the locomotive, from an ordinary journey in the passenger car or an
unconscious ride in the sleeper. Here he was on the crest of motion, at
the forefront of speed, and the quivering engine with the long train
behind it seemed like a living creature leaping along the track. It
responded to the labor of the fireman and the touch of the engineer
almost as if it could think and feel. Its pace quickened without a jar;
its great eye pierced the silvery space of moonlight with a shaft of
blazing yellow; the rails sang before it and trembled behind it; it was
an obedient and joyful monster, conquering distance and devouring
darkness.

On the wide level barrens beyond the Tete-a-Gouche River the locomotive
reached its best speed, purring like a huge cat and running smoothly.
McLeod leaned back on his bench with a satisfied air.

"She's doin' fine, the nicht," said he. "Ah'm thinkin', whiles, o' yer
auld Seelverhorrns. Whaur is he noo? Awa' up on Higan' Pond, gallantin'
around i' the licht o' the mune wi' a lady moose, an' the gladness juist
bubblin' in his hairt. Ye're no sorry that he's leevin' yet, are ye,
Dud?"

"Well," answered Hemenway slowly, between the puffs of his pipe, "I
can't say I'm sorry that he's alive and happy, though I'm not glad that
I lost him. But he did his best, the old rogue; he played a good game,
and he deserved to win. Where he is now nobody can tell. He was
traveling like a streak of lightning when I last saw him. By this time
he may be----"

"What's yon?" cried McLeod, springing up. Far ahead, in the narrow apex
of the converging rails stood a black form, motionless, mysterious.
McLeod grasped the whistle cord. The black form loomed higher in the
moonlight and was clearly silhouetted against the horizon--a big moose
standing across the track. They could see his grotesque head, his
shadowy horns, high, sloping shoulders. The engineer pulled the cord.
The whistle shrieked loud and long.

The moose turned and faced the sound. The glare of the headlight
fascinated, challenged, angered him. There he stood defiant, front feet
planted wide apart, head lowered, gazing steadily at the unknown enemy
that was rushing toward him. He was the monarch of the wilderness. There
was nothing in the world that he feared, except those strange-smelling
little beasts on two legs who crept around through the woods and shot
fire out of sticks. This was surely not one of those treacherous
animals, but some strange new creature that dared to shriek at him and
try to drive him out of its way. He would not move. He would try his
strength against this big yellow-eyed beast.

"Losh!" cried McLeod; "he's gaun' to fecht us!" and he dropped the cord,
grabbed the levers, and threw the steam off and the brakes on hard. The
heavy train slid groaning and jarring along the track. The moose never
stirred. The fire smoldered in his small narrow eyes. His black crest
was bristling. As the engine bore down upon him, not a rod away, he
reared high in the air, his antlers flashing in the blaze, and struck
full at the headlight with his immense fore feet. There was a shattering
of glass, a crash, a heavy shock, and the train slid on through the
darkness, lit only by the moon.

Thirty or forty yards beyond, the momentum was exhausted and the engine
came to a stop. Hemenway and McLeod clambered down and ran back, with
the other trainmen and a few of the passengers. The moose was lying in
the ditch beside the track, stone dead and frightfully shattered. But
the great head and the vast spreading antlers were intact.

"Seelverhorrns, sure enough!" said McLeod, bending over him. "He was
crossin' frae the Nepisiguit to the Jacquet; but he didna get across.
Weel, Dud, are ye glad? Ye hae kilt yer first moose!"

"Yes," said Hemenway, "it's my first moose. But it's your first moose,
too. And I think it's our last. Ye gods, what a fighter!"

FOOTNOTE:

[1] From _Days Off_. Copyright, 1907, by Charles Scribner's Sons. Used
by permission of the publishers.




[Illustration]




II.--The Wild-Horse Hunter[2]

_By Zane Grey_


I

THREE wild-horse hunters made camp one night beside a little stream in
the Sevier Valley, five hundred miles, as a crow flies, from Bostil's
Ford.

These hunters had a poor outfit, excepting, of course, their horses.
They were young men, rangy in build, lean and hard from life in the
saddle, bronzed like Indians, still-faced, and keen-eyed. Two of them
appeared to be tired out, and lagged at the camp-fire duties. When the
meager meal was prepared they sat, cross-legged, before a ragged
tarpaulin, eating and drinking in silence.

The sky in the west was rosy, slowly darkening. The valley floor
billowed away, ridged and cut, growing gray and purple and dark. Walls
of stone, pink with the last rays of the setting sun, inclosed the
valley, stretching away toward a long, low, black mountain range.

The place was wild, beautiful, open, with something nameless that made
the desert different from any other country. It was, perhaps, a
loneliness of vast stretches of valley and stone, clear to the eye, even
after sunset. That black mountain range, which looked close enough to
ride to before dark, was a hundred miles distant.

The shades of night fell swiftly, and it was dark by the time the
hunters finished the meal. Then the camp fire had burned low. One of the
three dragged branches of dead cedars and replenished the fire. Quickly
it flared up, with the white flame and crackle characteristic of dry
cedar. The night wind had risen, moaning through the gnarled, stunted
cedars near by, and it blew the fragrant wood smoke into the faces of
the two hunters, who seemed too tired to move.

"I reckon a pipe would help me make up my mind," said one.

"Wal, Bill," replied the other, dryly, "your mind's made up, else you'd
not say smoke."

"Why?"

"Because there ain't three pipefuls of thet precious tobacco left."

"Thet's one apiece, then. . . . Lin, come an' smoke the last pipe with
us."

The tallest of the three, he who had brought the firewood, stood in the
bright light of the blaze. He looked the born rider, light, lithe,
powerful.

"Sure, I'll smoke," he replied.

Then, presently, he accepted the pipe tendered him, and, sitting down
beside the fire, he composed himself to the enjoyment which his
companions evidently considered worthy of a decision they had reached.

"So this smokin' means you both want to turn back?" queried Lin, his
sharp gaze glancing darkly bright in the glow of the fire.

"Yep, we'll turn back. An', Gee! the relief I feel!" replied one.

"We've been long comin' to it, Lin, an' thet was for your sake," replied
the other.

Lin slowly pulled at his pipe and blew out the smoke as if reluctant to
part with it. "Let's go on," he said, quietly.

"No. I've had all I want of chasin' thet wild stallion," returned Bill,
shortly.

The other spread wide his hands and bent an expostulating look upon the
one called Lin. "We're two hundred miles out," he said. "There's only a
little flour left in the bag. No coffee! Only a little salt! All the
hosses except your big Nagger are played out. We're already in strange
country. An' you know what we've heerd of this an' all to the south.
It's all canyons, an' somewheres down there is thet awful canyon none of
our people ever seen. But we've heerd of it. An awful cut-up country."

He finished with a conviction that no one could say a word against the
common sense of his argument. Lin was silent, as if impressed.

Bill raised a strong, lean, brown hand in a forcible gesture. "We can't
ketch Wildfire!"

That seemed to him, evidently, a more convincing argument than his
comrade's.

"Bill is sure right, if I'm wrong, which I ain't," went on the other.
"Lin, we've trailed thet wild stallion for six weeks. Thet's the longest
chase he ever had. He's left his old range. He's cut out his band, an'
left them, one by one. We've tried every trick we know on him. An' he's
too smart for us. There's a hoss! Why, Lin, we're all but gone to the
dogs chasin' Wildfire. An' now I'm done, an' I'm glad of it."

There was another short silence, which presently Bill opened his lips to
break.

"Lin, it makes me sick to quit. I ain't denyin' thet for a long time
I've had hopes of ketchin' Wildfire. He's the grandest hoss I ever laid
eyes on. I reckon no man, onless he was an Arab, ever seen as good a
one. But now thet's neither here nor there. . . . We've got to hit the
back trail."

"Boys, I reckon I'll stick to Wildfire's tracks," said Lin, in the same
quiet tone.

Bill swore at him, and the other hunter grew excited and concerned.

"Lin Slone, are you gone plumb crazy over thet red hoss?"

"I--reckon," replied Slone. The working of his throat as he swallowed
could be plainly seen by his companions.

Bill looked at his ally as if to confirm some sudden understanding
between them. They took Slone's attitude gravely and they wagged their
heads doubtfully. . . . It was significant of the nature of riders that
they accepted his attitude and had consideration for his feelings. For
them the situation subtly changed. For weeks they had been three
wild-horse wranglers on a hard chase after a valuable stallion. They had
failed to get even close to him. They had gone to the limit of their
endurance and of the outfit, and it was time to turn back. But Slone had
conceived that strange and rare longing for a horse--a passion
understood, if not shared, by all riders. And they knew that he would
catch Wildfire or die in the attempt. From that moment their attitude
toward Slone changed as subtly as had come the knowledge of his feeling.
The gravity and gloom left their faces. It seemed they might have
regretted what they had said about the futility of catching Wildfire.
They did not want Slone to see or feel the hopelessness of his task.

"I tell you, Lin," said Bill, "your hoss Nagger's as good as when we
started."

"Aw, he's better," vouchsafed the other rider. "Nagger needed to lose
some weight. Lin, have you got an extra set of shoes for him?"

"No full set. Only three left," replied Lin, soberly.

"Wal, thet's enough. You can keep Nagger shod. An' _mebbe_ thet red
stallion will get sore feet an' go lame. Then you'd stand a chance."

"But Wildfire keeps travelin' the valleys--the soft ground," said Slone.

"No matter. He's leavin' the country, an' he's bound to strike sandstone
sooner or later. Then, by gosh! mebbe he'll wear off them hoofs."

"Say, can't he ring bells offen the rocks?" exclaimed Bill.

"Boys, do you think he's leavin' the country?" inquired Slone,
anxiously.

"Sure he is," replied Bill. "He ain't the first stallion I've chased off
the Sevier range. An' I know. It's a stallion thet makes for new
country, when you push him hard."

"Yep, Lin, he's sure leavin'," added the other comrade. "Why, he's
traveled a bee line for days! I'll bet he's seen us many a time.
Wildfire's about as smart as any man. He was born wild, an' his dam was
born wild, an' there you have it. The wildest of all wild creatures--a
wild stallion, with the intelligence of a man! A grand hoss, Lin, but
one thet has killed stallions all over the Sevier range. A wild
stallion thet's a killer! I never liked him for thet. Could he be
broke?"

"I'll break him," said Lin Slone, grimly. "It's gettin' him thet's the
job. I've got patience to break a hoss. But patience can't catch a
streak of lightnin'."

"Nope; you're right," replied Bill. "If you have some luck you'll get
him--mebbe. If he wears out his feet, or if you crowd him into a narrow
canyon, or run him into a bad place where he can't get by you. Thet might
happen. An' then, with Nagger, you stand a chance. Did you ever tire
thet hoss?"

"Not yet."

"An' how fur did you ever run him without a break? Why, when we ketched
thet sorrel last year I rode Nagger myself--thirty miles, most at a hard
gallop. An' he never turned a hair!"

"I've beat thet," replied Lin. "He could run hard fifty miles--mebbe
more. Honestly, I never seen him tired yet. If only he was fast!"

"Wal, Nagger ain't so slow, come to think of thet," replied Bill, with a
grunt. "He's good enough for you not to want another hoss."

"Lin, you're goin' to wear out Wildfire, an' then trap him somehow--is
thet the plan?" asked the other comrade.

"I haven't any plan. I'll just trail him, like a cougar trails a deer."

"Lin, if Wildfire gives you the slip he'll have to fly. You've got the
best eyes for tracks of any wrangler in Utah."

Slone accepted the compliment with a fleeting, doubtful smile on his
dark face. He did not reply, and no more was said by his comrades. They
rolled with backs to the fire. Slone put on more wood, for the keen wind
was cold and cutting; and then he lay down, his head on his saddle, with
a goatskin under him and a saddle blanket over him.

All three were soon asleep. The wind whipped the sand and ashes and
smoke over the sleepers. Coyotes barked from near in darkness, and from
the valley ridge came the faint mourn of a hunting wolf. The desert
night grew darker and colder.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Stewart brothers were wild-horse hunters for the sake of trades and
occasional sales. But Lin Slone never traded nor sold a horse he had
captured. The excitement of the game, and the lure of the desert, and
the love of a horse were what kept him at the profitless work. His type
was rare in the uplands.

These were the early days of the settlement of Utah, and only a few of
the hardiest and most adventurous pioneers had penetrated the desert in
the southern part of that vast upland. And with them came some of that
wild breed of riders to which Slone and the Stewarts belonged. Horses
were really more important and necessary than men; and this singular
fact gave these lonely riders a calling.

Before the Spaniards came there were no horses in the West. Those
explorers left or lost horses all over the southwest. Many of them were
Arabian horses of purest blood. American explorers and travelers, at the
outset of the nineteenth century, encountered countless droves of wild
horses all over the plains. Across the Grand canyon, however, wild horses
were comparatively few in number in the early days; and these had
probably come in by way of California.

The Stewarts and Slone had no established mode of catching wild horses.
The game had not developed fast enough for that. Every chase of horse or
drove was different; and once in many attempts they met with success.

A favorite method originated by the Stewarts was to find a water hole
frequented by the band of horses or the stallion wanted, and to build
round this hole a corral with an opening for the horses to get in. Then
the hunters would watch the trap at night, and if the horses went in to
drink, a gate was closed across the opening.

Another method of the Stewarts was to trail a coveted horse up on a mesa
or highland, places which seldom had more than one trail of ascent and
descent, and there block the escape, and cut lines of cedars, into which
the quarry was run till captured. Still another method, discovered by
accident, was to shoot a horse lightly in the neck and sting him. This
last, called creasing, was seldom successful, and for that matter in
any method ten times as many horses were killed as captured.

Lin Slone helped the Stewarts in their own way, but he had no especial
liking for their tricks. Perhaps a few remarkable captures of remarkable
horses had spoiled Slone. He was always trying what the brothers claimed
to be impossible. He was a fearless rider, but he had the fault of
saving his mount, and to kill a wild horse was a tragedy for him. He
would much rather have hunted alone, and he had been alone on the trail
of the stallion Wildfire when the Stewarts had joined him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lin Slone awoke next morning and rolled out of his blanket at his usual
early hour. But he was not early enough to say good-by to the Stewarts.
They were gone.

The fact surprised him and somehow relieved him. They had left him more
than his share of the outfit, and perhaps that was why they had slipped
off before dawn. They knew him well enough to know that he would not
have accepted it. Besides, perhaps they felt a little humiliation at
abandoning a chase which he chose to keep up. Anyway, they were gone,
apparently without breakfast.

The morning was clear, cool, with the air dark like that before a storm,
and in the east, over the steely wall of stone, shone a redness growing
brighter.

Slone looked away to the west, down the trail taken by his comrades,
but he saw nothing moving against that cedar-dotted waste.

"Good-by," he said, and he spoke as if he was saying good-by to more
than comrades.

"I reckon I won't see Sevier Village soon again--an' maybe never," he
soliloquized.

There was no one to regret him, unless it was old Mother Hall, who had
been kind to him on those rare occasions when he got out of the
wilderness. Still, it was with regret that he gazed away across the red
valley to the west. Slone had no home. His father and mother had been
lost in the massacre of a wagon train by Indians, and he had been one of
the few saved and brought to Salt Lake. That had happened when he was
ten years old. His life thereafter had been hard, and but for his sturdy
Texas training he might not have survived. The last five years he had
been a horse hunter in the wild uplands of Nevada and Utah.

Slone turned his attention to the pack of supplies. The Stewarts had
divided the flour and the parched corn equally, and unless he was
greatly mistaken they had left him most of the coffee and all of the
salt.

"Now I hold that decent of Bill an' Abe," said Slone, regretfully. "But
I could have got along without it better 'n they could."

Then he swiftly set about kindling a fire and getting a meal. In the
midst of his task a sudden ruddy brightness fell around him. Lin Slone
paused in his work to look up.

The sun had risen over the eastern wall.

"Ah!" he said, and drew a deep breath.

The cold, steely, darkling sweep of desert had been transformed. It was
now a world of red earth and gold rocks and purple sage, with everywhere
the endless straggling green cedars. A breeze whipped in, making the
fire roar softly. The sun felt warm on his cheek. And at the moment he
heard the whistle of his horse.

"Good old Nagger!" he said. "I shore won't have to track you this
mornin'."

Presently he went off into the cedars to find Nagger and the mustang
that he used to carry a pack. Nagger was grazing in a little open patch
among the trees, but the pack horse was missing. Slone seemed to know in
what direction to go to find the trail, for he came upon it very soon.
The pack horse wore hobbles, but he belonged to the class that could
cover a great deal of ground when hobbled. Slone did not expect the
horse to go far, considering that the grass thereabouts was good. But in
a wild-horse country it was not safe to give any horse a chance. The
call of his wild brethren was irresistible. Slone, however, found the
mustang standing quietly in a clump of cedars, and, removing the
hobbles, he mounted and rode back to camp. Nagger caught sight of him
and came at his call.

This horse Nagger appeared as unique in his class as Slone was rare
among riders. Nagger seemed of several colors, though black
predominated. His coat was shaggy, almost woolly, like that of a sheep.
He was huge, raw-boned, knotty, long of body and long of leg, with the
head of a war charger. His build did not suggest speed. There appeared
to be something slow and ponderous about him, similar to an elephant,
with the same suggestion of power and endurance.

Slone discarded the pack saddle and bags. The latter were almost empty.
He roped the tarpaulin on the back of the mustang, and, making a small
bundle of his few supplies, he tied that to the tarpaulin. His blanket
he used for a saddle blanket on Nagger. Of the utensils left by the
Stewarts he chose a couple of small iron pans, with long handles. The
rest he left. In his saddle bags he had a few extra horseshoes, some
nails, bullets for his rifle, and a knife with a heavy blade.

"Not a rich outfit for a far country," he mused. Slone did not talk very
much, and when he did he addressed Nagger and himself simultaneously.
Evidently he expected a long chase, one from which he would not return,
and light as his outfit was it would grow too heavy.

Then he mounted and rode down the gradual slope, facing the valley and
the black, bold, flat mountain to the southeast. Some few hundred yards
from camp he halted Nagger and bent over in the saddle to scrutinize
the ground.

The clean-cut track of a horse showed in the bare, hard sand. The hoof
marks were large, almost oval, perfect in shape, and manifestly they
were beautiful to Lin Slone. He gazed at them for a long time, and then
he looked across the dotted red valley up to the vast ridgy steppes,
toward the black plateau and beyond. It was the look that an Indian
gives to a strange country. Then Slone slipped off the saddle and knelt
to scrutinize the horse tracks. A little sand had blown into the
depressions, and some of it was wet and some of it was dry. He took his
time about examining it, and he even tried gently blowing other sand
into the tracks, to compare that with what was already there. Finally he
stood up and addressed Nagger.

"Reckon we won't have to argue with Abe an' Bill this mornin'," he said,
with satisfaction. "Wildfire made that track yesterday, before sunup."

Thereupon Slone remounted and put Nagger to a trot. The pack horse
followed with an alacrity that showed he had no desire for loneliness.

As straight as a bee line Wildfire had left a trail down into the floor
of the valley. He had not stopped to graze, and he had not looked for
water. Slone had hoped to find a water hole in one of the deep washes in
the red earth, but if there had been any water there Wildfire would have
scented it. He had not had a drink for three days that Slone knew of.
And Nagger had not drunk for forty hours. Slone had a canvas water bag
hanging over the pommel, but it was a habit of his to deny himself, as
far as possible, till his horse could drink also. Like an Indian, Slone
ate and drank but little.

It took four hours of steady trotting to reach the middle and bottom of
that wide, flat valley. A network of washes cut up the whole center of
it, and they were all as dry as bleached bone. To cross these Slone had
only to keep Wildfire's trail. And it was proof of Nagger's quality that
he did not have to veer from the stallion's course.

It was hot down in the lowland. The heat struck up, reflected from the
sand. But it was a March sun, and no more than pleasant to Slone. The
wind rose, however, and blew dust and sand in the faces of horse and
rider. Except lizards Slone did not see any living things.

Miles of low greasewood and sparse yellow sage led to the first almost
imperceptible rise of the valley floor on that side. The distant cedars
beckoned to Slone. He was not patient, because he was on the trail of
Wildfire; but, nevertheless, the hours seemed short.

Slone had no past to think about, and the future held nothing except a
horse, and so his thoughts revolved the possibilities connected with
this chase of Wildfire. The chase was hopeless in such country as he was
traversing, and if Wildfire chose to roam around valleys like this one
Slone would fail utterly. But the stallion had long ago left his band of
horses, and then, one by one his favorite consorts, and now he was
alone, headed with unerring instinct for wild, untrammeled ranges. He
had been used to the pure, cold water and the succulent grass of the
cold desert uplands. Assuredly he would not tarry in such barren lands
as these.

For Slone an ever-present and growing fascination lay in Wildfire's
clear, sharply defined tracks. It was as if every hoof mark told him
something. Once, far up the interminable ascent, he found on a ridge top
tracks showing where Wildfire had halted and turned.

"Ha, Nagger!" cried Slone, exultingly. "Look there! He's begun facin'
about. He's wonderin' if we're still after him. He's worried. . . . But
we'll keep out of sight--a day behind."

When Slone reached the cedars the sun was low down in the west. He
looked back across the fifty miles of valley to the colored cliffs and
walls. He seemed to be above them now, and the cool air, with tang of
cedar and juniper, strengthened the impression that he had climbed high.

A mile or more ahead of him rose a gray cliff with breaks in it and a
line of dark cedars or pinyons on the level rims. He believed these
breaks to be the mouths of canyons, and so it turned out. Wildfire's
trail led into the mouth of a narrow canyon with very steep and high
walls. Nagger snorted his perception of water, and the mustang whistled.
Wildfire's tracks led to a point under the wall where a spring gushed
forth. There were mountain lion and deer tracks also, as well as those
of smaller game.

Slone made camp here. The mustang was tired. But Nagger, upon taking a
long drink, rolled in the grass as if he had just begun the trip. After
eating, Slone took his rifle and went out to look for deer. But there
appeared to be none at hand. He came across many lion tracks, and saw,
with apprehension, where one had taken Wildfire's trail. Wildfire had
grazed up the canyon, keeping on and on, and he was likely to go miles in
a night. Slone reflected that as small as were his own chances of
getting Wildfire, they were still better than those of a mountain lion.
Wildfire was the most cunning of all animals--a wild stallion; his speed
and endurance were incomparable; his scent as keen as those animals that
relied wholly upon scent to warn them of danger; and as for sight, it
was Slone's belief that no hoofed creature, except the mountain sheep
used to high altitudes, could see as far as a wild horse.

It bothered Slone a little that he was getting into a lion country.
Nagger showed nervousness, something unusual for him. Slone tied both
horses with long halters and stationed them on patches of thick grass.
Then he put a cedar stump on the fire and went to sleep. Upon awakening
and going to the spring he was somewhat chagrined to see that deer had
come down to drink early. Evidently they were numerous. A lion country
was always a deer country, for the lions followed the deer.

Slone was packed and saddled and on his way before the sun reddened the
canyon wall. He walked the horses. From time to time he saw signs of
Wildfire's consistent progress. The canyon narrowed and the walls grew
lower and the grass increased. There was a decided ascent all the time.
Slone could find no evidence that the canyon had ever been traveled by
hunters or Indians. The day was pleasant and warm and still. Every once
in a while a little breath of wind would bring a fragrance of cedar and
pinyon, and a sweet hint of pine and sage. At every turn he looked ahead,
expecting to see the green of pine and the gray of sage. Toward the
middle of the afternoon, coming to a place where Wildfire had taken to a
trot, he put Nagger to that gait, and by sundown had worked up to where
the canyon was only a shallow ravine. And finally it turned once more, to
lose itself in a level where straggling pines stood high above the
cedars, and great, dark-green silver spruces stood above the pines. And
here were patches of sage, fresh and pungent, and long reaches of
bleached grass. It was the edge of a forest. Wildfire's trail went on.
Slone came at length to a group of pines, and here he found the remains
of a camp fire, and some flint arrow-heads. Indians had been in there,
probably having come from the opposite direction to Slone's. This
encouraged him, for where Indians could hunt so could he. Soon he was
entering a forest where cedars and pinyons and pines began to grow
thickly. Presently he came upon a faintly defined trail, just a dim,
dark line even to an experienced eye. But it was a trail, and Wildfire
had taken it.

Slone halted for the night. The air was cold. And the dampness of it
gave him an idea there were snow banks somewhere not far distant. The
dew was already heavy on the grass. He hobbled the horses and put a bell
on Nagger. A bell might frighten lions that had never heard one. Then he
built a fire and cooked his meal.

It had been long since he had camped high up among the pines. The sough
of the wind pleased him, like music. There had begun to be prospects of
pleasant experience along with the toil of chasing Wildfire. He was
entering new and strange and beautiful country. How far might the chase
take him? He did not care. He was not sleepy, but even if he had been it
developed that he must wait till the coyotes ceased their barking round
his camp fire. They came so close that he saw their gray shadows in the
gloom. But presently they wearied of yelping at him and went away. After
that the silence, broken only by the wind as it roared and lulled,
seemed beautiful to Slone. He lost completely that sense of vague regret
which had remained with him, and he forgot the Stewarts. And suddenly he
felt absolutely free, alone, with nothing behind to remember, with wild,
thrilling, nameless life before him. Just then the long mourn of a
timber wolf wailed in with the wind. Seldom had he heard the cry of one
of those night wanderers. There was nothing like it--no sound like it to
fix in the lone camper's heart the great solitude and the wild.


II

In the early morning when all was gray and the big, dark pines were
shadowy specters, Slone was awakened by the cold. His hands were so numb
that he had difficulty starting a fire. He stood over the blaze, warming
them. The air was nipping, clear and thin, and sweet with frosty
fragrance.

Daylight came while he was in the midst of his morning meal. A white
frost covered the ground and crackled under his feet as he went out to
bring in the horses. He saw fresh deer tracks. Then he went back to camp
for his rifle. Keeping a sharp lookout for game, he continued his search
for the horses.

The forest was open and parklike. There were no fallen trees or
evidences of fire. Presently he came to a wide glade in the midst of
which Nagger and the pack mustang were grazing with a herd of deer. The
size of the latter amazed Slone. The deer he had hunted back on the
Sevier range were much smaller than these. Evidently these were mule
deer, closely allied to the elk. They were so tame they stood facing him
curiously, with long ears erect. It was sheer murder to kill a deer
standing and watching like that, but Slone was out of meat and hungry
and facing a long, hard trip. He shot a buck, which leaped spasmodically
away, trying to follow the herd, and fell at the edge of the glade.
Slone cut out a haunch, and then, catching the horses, he returned to
camp, where he packed and saddled, and at once rode out on the dim
trail.

The wilderness of the country he was entering was evident in the fact
that as he passed the glade where he had shot the deer a few minutes
before, there were coyotes quarreling over the carcass.

Slone could see ahead and on each side several hundred yards, and
presently he ascertained that the forest floor was not so level as he
had supposed. He had entered a valley or was traversing a wide, gently
sloping pass. He went through thickets of juniper, and had to go around
clumps of quaking asp. The pines grew larger and farther apart. Cedars
and pinyons had been left behind, and he had met with no silver spruces
after leaving camp. Probably that point was the height of a divide.
There were banks of snow in some of the hollows on the north side.
Evidently the snow had very recently melted, and it was evident also
that the depth of snow through here had been fully ten feet, judging
from the mutilation of the juniper trees where the deer, standing on the
hard, frozen crust, had browsed upon the branches.

The quiet of the forest thrilled Slone. And the only movement was the
occasional gray flash of a deer or coyote across a glade. No birds of
any species crossed Slone's sight. He came, presently, upon a lion track
in the trail, made probably a day before. Slone grew curious about it,
seeing how it held, as he was holding, to Wildfire's tracks. After a
mile or so he made sure the lion had been trailing the stallion, and for
a second he felt a cold contraction of his heart. Already he loved
Wildfire, and by virtue of all this toil of travel considered the wild
horse his property.

"No lion could ever get close to Wildfire," he soliloquized, with a
short laugh. Of that he was absolutely certain.

The sun rose, melting the frost, and a breath of warm air, laden with
the scent of pine, moved heavily under the huge, yellow trees. Slone
passed a point where the remains of an old camp fire and a pile of deer
antlers were further proof that Indians visited this plateau to hunt.
From this camp broader, more deeply defined trails led away to the south
and east. Slone kept to the east trail, in which Wildfire's tracks and
those of the lion showed clearly. It was about the middle of the
forenoon when the tracks of the stallion and lion left the trail to lead
up a little draw where grass grew thick. Slone followed, reading the
signs of Wildfire's progress, and the action of his pursuer, as well as
if he had seen them. Here the stallion had plowed into a snow bank,
eating a hole two feet deep; then he had grazed around a little; then on
and on; there his splendid tracks were deep in the soft earth. Slone
knew what to expect when the track of the lion veered from those of the
horse, and he followed the lion tracks. The ground was soft from the
late melting of snow, and Nagger sunk deep. The lion left a plain track.
Here he stole steadily along; there he left many tracks at a point where
he might have halted to make sure of his scent. He was circling on the
trail of the stallion, with cunning intent of ambush. The end of this
slow, careful stalk of the lion, as told in his tracks, came upon the
edge of a knoll where he had crouched to watch and wait. From this perch
he had made a magnificent spring--Slone estimating it to be forty
feet--but he had missed the stallion. There were Wildfire's tracks
again, slow and short, and then deep and sharp where in the impetus of
fright he had sprung out of reach. A second leap of the lion, and then
lessening bounds, and finally an abrupt turn from Wildfire's trail told
the futility of that stalk. Slone made certain that Wildfire was so keen
that as he grazed along he had kept to open ground.

Wildfire had run for a mile, then slowed down to a trot, and he had
circled to get back to the trail he had left. Slone believed the horse
was just so intelligent. At any rate, Wildfire struck the trail again,
and turned at right angles to follow it.

Here the forest floor appeared perfectly level. Patches of snow became
frequent, and larger as Slone went on. At length the patches closed up,
and soon extended as far as he could see. It was soft, affording
difficult travel. Slone crossed hundreds of deer tracks, and the trail
he was on evidently became a deer runway.

Presently, far down one of the aisles between the great pines Slone saw
what appeared to be a yellow cliff, far away. It puzzled him. And as he
went on he received the impression that the forest dropped out of sight
ahead. Then the trees grew thicker, obstructing his view. Presently the
trail became soggy and he had to help his horse. The mustang floundered
in the soft snow and earth. Cedars and pinyons appeared again, making
travel still more laborious.

All at once there came to Slone a strange consciousness of light and
wind and space and void. On the instant his horse halted with a snort.
Slone quickly looked up. Had he come to the end of the world? An abyss,
a canyon, yawned beneath him, beyond all comparison in its greatness. His
keen eye, educated to desert distance and dimension swept down and
across, taking in the tremendous truth, before it staggered his
comprehension. But a second sweeping glance, slower, becoming
intoxicated with what it beheld, saw gigantic cliff steppes and yellow
slopes dotted with cedars, leading down to clefts filled with purple
smoke, and these led on and on to a ragged red world of rock, bare,
shining, bold, uplifted in mesa, dome, peak, and crag, clear and strange
in the morning light, still and sleeping like death.

This, then, was the great canyon, which had seemed like a hunter's fable
rather than truth. Slone's sight dimmed, blurring the spectacle, and he
found that his eyes had filled with tears. He wiped them away and looked
again and again, until he was confounded by the vastness and grandeur
and the vague sadness of the scene. Nothing he had ever looked at had
affected him like this canyon, although the Stewarts had tried to prepare
him for it.

It was the horse hunter's passion that reminded him of his pursuit. The
deer trail led down through a break in the wall. Only a few rods of it
could be seen. This trail was passable, even though choked with snow.
But the depth beyond this wall seemed to fascinate Slone and hold him
back, used as he was to desert trails. Then the clean mark of Wildfire's
hoof brought back the old thrill.

"This place fits you, Wildfire," muttered Slone, dismounting.

He started down, leading Nagger. The mustang followed. Slone kept to the
wall side of the trail, fearing the horses might slip. The snow held
firmly at first and Slone had no trouble. The gap in the rim rock
widened to a slope thickly grown over with cedars and pinyons and
manzanita. This growth made the descent more laborious, yet afforded
means at least for Slone to go down with less danger. There was no
stopping. Once started, the horses had to keep on. Slone saw the
impossibility of ever climbing out while that snow was there. The trail
zigzagged down and down. Very soon the yellow wall hung tremendously
over him, straight up. The snow became thinner and softer. The horses
began to slip. They slid on their haunches. Fortunately the slope grew
less steep, and Slone could see below where it reached out to
comparatively level ground. Still, a mishap might yet occur. Slone kept
as close to Nagger as possible, helping him whenever he could do it. The
mustang slipped, rolled over, and then slipped past Slone, went down the
slope to bring up in a cedar. Slone worked down to him and extricated
him. Then the huge Nagger began to slide. Snow and loose rock slid with
him, and so did Slone. The little avalanche stopped of its own accord,
and then Slone dragged Nagger on down and down, presently to come to the
end of the steep descent. Slone looked up to see that he had made short
work of a thousand-foot slope. Here cedars and pinyons grew thickly
enough to make a forest. The snow thinned out to patches, and then
failed. But the going remained bad for a while as the horses sank deep
in a soft red earth. This eventually grew more solid and finally dry.
Slone worked out of the cedars to what appeared a grassy plateau
inclosed by the great green and white slope with its yellow wall
overhanging, and distant mesas and cliffs. Here his view was restricted.
He was down on the first bench of the great canyon. And there was the
deer trail, a well-worn path keeping to the edge of the slope. Slone
came to a deep cut in the earth, and the trail headed it, where it began
at the last descent of the slope. It was the source of a canyon. He
could look down to see the bare, worn rock, and a hundred yards from
where he stood the earth was washed from its rims and it began to show
depth and something of that ragged outline which told of violence of
flood. The trail headed many canyons like this, all running down across
this bench, disappearing, dropping invisibly. The trail swung to the
left under the great slope, and then presently it climbed to a higher
bench. Here were brush and grass and huge patches of sage, so pungent
that it stung Slone's nostrils. Then he went down again, this time to
come to a clear brook lined by willows. Here the horses drank long and
Slone refreshed himself. The sun had grown hot. There was fragrance of
flowers he could not see and a low murmur of a waterfall that was
likewise invisible. For most of the time his view was shut off, but
occasionally he reached a point where through some break he saw towers
gleaming red in the sun. A strange place, a place of silence, and smoky
veils in the distance. Time passed swiftly. Toward the waning of the
afternoon he began to climb what appeared to be a saddle of land,
connecting the canyon wall on the left with a great plateau, gold-rimmed
and pine-fringed, rising more and more in his way as he advanced. At
sunset Slone was more shut in than for several hours. He could tell the
time was sunset by the golden light on the cliff wall again overhanging
him. The slope was gradual up to this pass to the saddle, and upon
coming to a spring and the first pine trees, he decided to halt for
camp. The mustang was almost exhausted.

Thereupon he hobbled the horses in the luxuriant grass round the spring,
and then unrolled his pack. Once as dusk came stealing down, while he
was eating his meal, Nagger whistled in fright. Slone saw a gray,
pantherish form gliding away into the shadows. He took a quick shot at
it, but missed.

"It's a lion country, all right," he said. And then he set about
building a big fire on the other side of the grassy plot, so as to have
the horses between fires. He cut all the venison into thin strips, and
spent an hour roasting them. Then he lay down to rest, and he said:
"Wonder where Wildfire is to-night? Am I closer to him? Where's he
headin' for?"

The night was warm and still. It was black near the huge cliff, and
overhead velvety blue, with stars of white fire. It seemed to him that
he had become more thoughtful and observing of the aspects of his wild
environment, and he felt a welcome consciousness of loneliness. Then
sleep came to him and the night seemed short. In the gray dawn he arose
refreshed.

The horses were restive. Nagger snorted a welcome. Evidently they had
passed an uneasy night. Slone found lion tracks at the spring and in
sandy places. Presently he was on his way up to the notch between the
great wall and the plateau. A growth of thick scrub oak made travel
difficult. It had not appeared far up to that saddle, but it was far.
There were straggling pine trees and huge rocks that obstructed his
gaze. But once up he saw that the saddle was only a narrow ridge, curved
to slope up on both sides.

Straight before Slone and under him opened the canyon, blazing and
glorious along the peaks and ramparts, where the rising sun struck,
misty and smoky and shadowy down in those mysterious depths.

It took an effort not to keep on gazing. But Slone turned to the grim
business of his pursuit. The trail he saw leading down had been made by
Indians. It was used probably once a year by them; and also by wild
animals, and it was exceedingly steep and rough. Wildfire had paced to
and fro along the narrow ridge of that saddle, making many tracks,
before he had headed down again. Slone imagined that the great stallion
had been daunted by the tremendous chasm, but had finally faced it,
meaning to put this obstacle between him and his pursuers. It never
occurred to Slone to attribute less intelligence to Wildfire than that.
So, dismounting, Slone took Nagger's bridle and started down. The
mustang with the pack was reluctant. He snorted and whistled and pawed
the earth. But he would not be left alone, so he followed.

The trail led down under cedars that fringed a precipice. Slone was
aware of this without looking. He attended only to the trail and to his
horse. Only an Indian could have picked out that course, and it was
cruel to put a horse to it. But Nagger was powerful, sure-footed, and
he would go anywhere that Slone led him. Gradually Slone worked down and
away from the bulging rim wall. It was hard, rough work, and risky
because it could not be accomplished slowly. Brush and rocks, loose
shale and weathered slope, long, dusty inclines of yellow earth, and
jumbles of stone--these made bad going for miles of slow, zigzag trail
down out of the cedars. Then the trail entered what appeared to be a
ravine.

That ravine became a canyon. At its head it was a dry wash, full of
gravel and rocks. It began to cut deep into the bowels of the earth. It
shut out sight of the surrounding walls and peaks. Water appeared from
under a cliff and, augmented by other springs, became a brook. Hot, dry,
and barren at its beginning, this cleft became cool and shady and
luxuriant with grass and flowers and amber moss with silver blossoms.
The rocks had changed color from yellow to deep red. Four hours of
turning and twisting, endlessly down and down, over bowlders and banks
and every conceivable roughness of earth and rock, finished the pack
mustang; and Slone mercifully left him in a long reach of canyon where
grass and water never failed. In this place Slone halted for the noon
hour, letting Nagger have his fill of the rich grazing. Nagger's three
days in grassy upland, despite the continuous travel by day, had
improved him. He looked fat, and Slone had not yet caught the horse
resting. Nagger was iron to endure. Here Slone left all the outfit
except what was on his saddle, and the sack containing the few pounds
of meat and supplies, and the two utensils. This sack he tied on the
back of his saddle, and resumed his journey.

Presently he came to a place where Wildfire had doubled on his trail and
had turned up a side canyon. The climb out was hard on Slone, if not on
Nagger. Once up, Slone found himself upon a wide, barren plateau of
glaring red rock and clumps of greasewood and cactus. The plateau was
miles wide, shut in by great walls and mesas of colored rock. The
afternoon sun beat down fiercely. A blast of wind, as if from a furnace,
swept across the plateau, and it was laden with red dust. Slone walked
here, where he could have ridden. And he made several miles of
up-and-down progress over this rough plateau. The great walls of the
opposite side of the canyon loomed appreciably closer. What, Slone
wondered, was at the bottom of this rent in the earth? The great desert
river was down there, of course, but he knew nothing of it. Would that
turn back Wildfire? Slone thought grimly how he had always claimed
Nagger to be part fish and part bird. Wildfire was not going to escape.

By and by only isolated mescal plants with long, yellow-plumed spears
broke the bare monotony of the plateau. And Slone passed from red sand
and gravel to a red, soft shale, and from that to hard, red rock. Here
Wildfire's tracks were lost, the first time in seven weeks. But Slone
had his direction down that plateau with the cleavage lines of canyons
to right and left. At times Slone found a vestige of the old Indian
trail, and this made him doubly sure of being right. He did not need to
have Wildfire's tracks. He let Nagger pick the way, and the horse made
no mistake in finding the line of least resistance. But that grew harder
and harder. This bare rock, like a file, would soon wear Wildfire's
hoofs thin. And Slone rejoiced. Perhaps somewhere down in this awful
chasm he and Nagger would have if out with the stallion. Slone began to
look far ahead, beginning to believe that he might see Wildfire. Twice
he had seen Wildfire, but only at a distance. Then he had resembled a
running streak of fire, whence his name, which Slone had given him.

This bare region of rock began to be cut up into gullies. It was
necessary to head them or to climb in and out. Miles of travel really
meant little progress straight ahead. But Slone kept on. He was hot and
Nagger was hot, and that made hard work easier. Sometimes on the wind
came a low thunder. Was it a storm or an avalanche slipping or falling
water? He could not tell. The sound was significant and haunting.

Of one thing he was sure--that he could not have found his back trail.
But he divined he was never to retrace his steps on this journey. The
stretch of broken plateau before him grew wilder and bolder of outline,
darker in color, weirder in aspect and progress across it grew slower,
more dangerous. There were many places Nagger should not have been put
to--where a slip meant a broken leg. But Slone could not turn back. And
something besides an indomitable spirit kept him going. Again the sound
resembling thunder assailed his ears, louder this time. The plateau
appeared to be ending in a series of great capes or promontories. Slone
feared he would soon come out upon a promontory from which he might see
the impossibility of further travel. He felt relieved down in the
gullies, where he could not see far. He climbed out of one, presently,
from which there extended a narrow ledge with a slant too perilous for
any horse. He stepped out upon that with far less confidence than
Nagger. To the right was a bulge of low wall, and a few feet to the left
a dark precipice. The trail here was faintly outlined, and it was six
inches wide and slanting as well. It seemed endless to Slone, that
ledge. He looked only down at his feet and listened to Nagger's steps.
The big horse trod carefully, but naturally, and he did not slip. That
ledge extended in a long curve, turning slowly away from the precipice,
and ascending a little at the further end. Slone drew a deep breath of
relief when he led Nagger up on level rock.

Suddenly a strange yet familiar sound halted Slone, as if he had been
struck. The wild, shrill, high-pitched, piercing whistle of a stallion!
Nagger neighed a blast in reply and pounded the rock with his iron-shod
hoofs. With a thrill Slone looked ahead.

There, some few hundred yards distant, on a promontory, stood a red
horse.

"It's Wildfire!" breathed Slone, tensely.

He could not believe his sight. He imagined he was dreaming. But as
Nagger stamped and snorted defiance Slone looked with fixed and keen
gaze, and knew that beautiful picture was no lie.

Wildfire was as red as fire. His long mane, wild in the wind, was like a
whipping, black-streaked flame. Silhouetted there against that canyon
background he seemed gigantic, a demon horse, ready to plunge into fiery
depths. He was looking back over his shoulder, his head very high, and
every line of him was instinct with wildness. Again he sent out that
shrill, air-splitting whistle. Slone understood it to be a clarion call
to Nagger. If Nagger had been alone Wildfire would have killed him. The
red stallion was a killer of horses. All over the Utah ranges he had
left the trail of a murderer. Nagger understood this, too, for he
whistled back in rage and terror. It took an iron arm to hold him. Then
Wildfire plunged, apparently down, and vanished from Slone's sight.

Slone hurried onward, to be blocked by a huge crack in the rocky
plateau. This he had to head. And then another and like obstacle checked
his haste to reach that promontory. He was forced to go more slowly.
Wildfire had been close only as to sight. And this was the great canyon
that dwarfed distance and magnified proximity. Climbing down and up,
toiling on, he at last learned patience. He had seen Wildfire at close
range. That was enough. So he plodded on, once more returning to careful
regard of Nagger. It took an hour of work to reach the point where
Wildfire had disappeared.

A promontory indeed it was, overhanging a valley a thousand feet below.
A white torrent of a stream wound through it. There were lines of green
cottonwoods following the winding course. Then Slone saw Wildfire slowly
crossing the flat toward the stream. He had gone down that cliff, which
to Slone looked perpendicular.

Wildfire appeared to be walking lame. Slone, making sure of this,
suffered a pang. Then, when the significance of such lameness dawned
upon him he whooped his wild joy and waved his hat. The red stallion
must have heard, for he looked up. Then he went on again and waded into
the stream, where he drank long. When he started to cross, the swift
current drove him back in several places. The water wreathed white
around him. But evidently it was not deep, and finally he crossed. From
the other side he looked up again at Nagger and Slone, and, going on, he
soon was out of sight in the cottonwoods.

"How to get down!" muttered Slone.

There was a break in the cliff wall, a bare stone slant where horses had
gone down and come up. That was enough for Slone to know. He would have
attempted the descent if he were sure no other horse but Wildfire had
ever gone down there. But Slone's hair began to rise stiff on his head.
A horse like Wildfire, and mountain sheep and Indian ponies, were all
very different from Nagger. The chances were against Nagger.

"Come on, old boy. If I can do it, you can," he said.

Slone had never seen a trail as perilous as this. He was afraid for his
horse. A slip there meant death. The way Nagger trembled in every muscle
showed his feelings. But he never flinched. He would follow Slone
anywhere, providing Slone rode him or led him. And here, as riding was
impossible, Slone went before. If the horse slipped there would be a
double tragedy, for Nagger would knock his master off the cliff. Slone
set his teeth and stepped down. He did not let Nagger see his fear. He
was taking the greatest risk he had ever run.

The break in the wall led to a ledge, and the ledge dropped from step to
step, and these had bare, slippery slants between. Nagger was splendid
on a bad trail. He had methods peculiar to his huge build and great
weight. He crashed down over the stone steps, both front hoofs at once.
The slants he slid down on his haunches with his forelegs stiff and the
iron shoes scraping. He snorted and heaved and grew wet with sweat. He
tossed his head at some of the places. But he never hesitated and it was
impossible for him to go slowly. Whenever Slone came to corrugated
stretches in the trail he felt grateful. But these were few. The rock
was like smooth red iron. Slone had never seen such hard rock. It took
him long to realize that it was marble. His heart seemed a tense,
painful knot in his breast, as if it could not beat, holding back in the
strained suspense. But Nagger never jerked on the bridle. He never
faltered. Many times he slipped, often with both front feet, but never
with all four feet. So he did not fall. And the red wall began to loom
above Sloan. Then suddenly he seemed brought to a point where it was
impossible to descend. It was a round bulge, slanting fearfully, with
only a few rough surfaces to hold a foot. Wildfire had left a broad,
clear-swept mark at that place, and red hairs on some of the sharp
points. He had slid down. Below was an offset that fortunately prevented
further sliding. Slone started to walk down this place, but when Nagger
began to slide Slone had to let go the bridle and jump. Both he and the
horse landed safely. Luck was with them. And they went on, down and
down, to reach the base of the great wall, scraped and exhausted, wet
with sweat, but unhurt. As Slone gazed upward he felt the impossibility
of believing what he knew to be true. He hugged and petted the horse.
Then he led on to the roaring stream.

It was green water white with foam. Slone waded in and found the water
cool and shallow and very swift. He had to hold to Nagger to keep from
being swept downstream. They crossed in safety. There in the sand
showed Wildfire's tracks. And here were signs of another Indian camp,
half a year old.

The shade of the cotton woods was pleasant. Slone found this valley
oppressively hot. There was no wind and the sand blistered his feet
through his boots. Wildfire held to the Indian trail that had guided him
down into this wilderness of worn rock. And that trail crossed the
stream at every turn of the twisting, narrow valley. Slone enjoyed
getting into the water. He hung his gun over the pommel and let the
water roll him. A dozen times he and Nagger forded the rushing torrent.
Then they came to a boxlike closing of the valley to canyon walls, and
here the trail evidently followed the stream bed. There was no other
way. Slone waded in, and stumbled, rolled, and floated ahead of the
sturdy horse. Nagger was wet to his breast, but he did not fall. This
gulch seemed full of a hollow rushing roar. It opened out into a wide
valley. And Wildfire's tracks took to the left side and began to climb
the slope.

Here the traveling was good, considering what had been passed. Once up
out of the valley floor Slone saw Wildfire far ahead, high on the slope.
He did not appear to be limping, but he was not going fast. Slone
watched as he climbed. What and where would be the end of this chase?

Sometimes Wildfire was plain in his sight for a moment, but usually he
was hidden by rocks. The slope was one great talus, a jumble of
weathered rock, fallen from what appeared a mountain of red and yellow
wall. Here the heat of the sun fell upon him like fire. The rocks were
so hot Slone could not touch them with bare hand. The close of the
afternoon was approaching, and this slope was interminably long. Still,
it was not steep, and the trail was good.

At last from the height of slope Wildfire appeared, looking back and
down. Then he was gone. Slone plodded upward. Long before he reached
that summit he heard the dull rumble of the river. It grew to be a roar,
yet it seemed distant. Would the great desert river stop Wildfire in his
flight? Slone doubted it. He surmounted the ridge, to find the canyon
opening in a tremendous gap, and to see down, far down, a glittering,
sun-blasted slope merging into a deep, black gulch where a red river
swept and chafed and roared.

Somehow the river was what he had expected to see. A force that had cut
and ground this canyon could have been nothing but a river like that. The
trail led down, and Slone had no doubt that it crossed the river and led
up out of the canyon. He wanted to stay there and gaze endlessly and
listen. At length he began the descent. As he proceeded it seemed that
the roar of the river lessened. He could not understand why this was so.
It took half an hour to reach the last level, a ghastly, black, and
iron-ribbed canyon bed, with the river splitting it. He had not had a
glimpse of Wildfire on this side of the divide, but he found his tracks,
and they led down off the last level, through a notch in the black bank
of marble to a sand bar and the river.

Wildfire had walked straight off the sand into the water. Slone studied
the river and shore. The water ran slow, heavily, in sluggish eddies.
From far up the canyon came the roar of a rapid, and from below the roar
of another, heavier and closer. The river appeared tremendous, in ways
Slone felt rather than realized, yet it was not swift. Studying the
black, rough wall of rock above him, he saw marks where the river had
been sixty feet higher than where he stood on the sand. It was low,
then. How lucky for him that he had gotten there before flood season! He
believed Wildfire had crossed easily, and he knew Nagger could make it.
Then he piled and tied his supplies and weapons high on the saddle, to
keep them dry, and looked for a place to take to the water.

Wildfire had sunk deep before reaching the edge. Manifestly he had
lunged the last few feet. Slone found a better place, and waded in,
urging Nagger. The big horse plunged, almost going under, and began to
swim. Slone kept upstream beside him. He found, presently, that the
water was thick and made him tired, so it was necessary to grasp a
stirrup and be towed. The river appeared only a few hundred feet wide,
but probably it was wider than it looked. Nagger labored heavily near
the opposite shore; still, he landed safely upon a rocky bank. There
were patches of sand in which Wildfire's tracks showed so fresh that
the water had not yet dried out of them.

Slone rested his horse before attempting to climb out of that split in
the rock. However, Wildfire had found an easy ascent. On this side of
the canyon the bare rock did not predominate. A clear trail led up a
dusty, gravelly slope, upon which scant greasewood and cactus appeared.
Half an hour's climbing brought Slone to where he could see that he was
entering a vast valley, sloping up and narrowing to a notch in the dark
cliffs, above which towered the great red wall and about that the slopes
of cedar and the yellow rim rock.

And scarcely a mile distant, bright in the westering sunlight, shone the
red stallion, moving slowly.

Slone pressed on steadily. Just before dark he came to an ideal spot to
camp. The valley had closed up, so that the lofty walls cast shadows
that met. A clump of cottonwoods surrounding a spring, abundance of rich
grass, willows and flowers lining the banks, formed an oasis in the bare
valley. Slone was tired out from the day of ceaseless toil down and up,
and he could scarcely keep his eyes open. But he tried to stay awake.
The dead silence of the valley, the dry fragrance, the dreaming walls,
the advent of night low down, when up on the ramparts the last red rays
of the sun lingered, the strange loneliness--these were sweet and
comforting to him.

And that night's sleep was as a moment. He opened his eyes to see the
crags and towers and peaks and domes, and the lofty walls of that vast,
broken chaos of canyons across the river. They were now emerging from the
misty gray of dawn, growing pink and lilac and purple under the rising
sun.

He arose and set about his few tasks, which, being soon finished,
allowed him an early start.

Wildfire had grazed along no more than a mile in the lead. Slone looked
eagerly up the narrowing canyon, but he was not rewarded by a sight of
the stallion. As he progressed up a gradually ascending trail he became
aware of the fact that the notch he had long looked up to was where the
great red walls closed in and almost met. And the trail zigzagged up
this narrow vent, so steep that only a few steps could be taken without
rest. Slone toiled up for an hour--an age--till he was wet, burning,
choked, with a great weight on his chest. Yet still he was only halfway
up that awful break between the walls. Sometimes he could have tossed a
stone down upon a part of the trail, only a few rods below, yet many,
many weary steps of actual toil. As he got farther up the notch widened.
What had been scarcely visible from the valley below was now colossal in
actual dimensions. The trail was like a twisted mile of thread between
two bulging mountain walls leaning their ledges and fronts over this
tilted pass.

Slone rested often. Nagger appreciated this and heaved gratefully at
every halt. In this monotonous toil Slone forgot the zest of his
pursuit. And when Nagger suddenly snorted in fright Slone was not
prepared for what he saw.

Above him ran a low, red wall, around which evidently the trail led. At
the curve, which was a promontory, scarcely a hundred feet in an air
line above him, he saw something red moving, bobbing, coming out into
view. It was a horse.

Wildfire--no farther away than the length of three lassos!

There he stood looking down. He fulfilled all of Slone's dreams. Only he
was bigger. But he was so magnificently proportioned that he did not
seem heavy. His coat was shaggy and red. It was not glossy. The color
was what made him shine. His mane was like a crest, mounting, then
falling low. Slone had never seen so much muscle on a horse. Yet his
outline was graceful, beautiful. The head was indeed that of the wildest
of all wild creatures--a stallion born wild--and it was beautiful,
savage, splendid, everything but noble. Slone thought that if a horse
could express hate, surely Wildfire did then. It was certain that he did
express curiosity and fury.

Slone shook a gantleted fist at the stallion, as if the horse were
human. That was a natural action for a rider of his kind. Wildfire
turned away, showed bright against the dark background, and then
disappeared.


III

That was the last Slone saw of Wildfire for three days.

It took all of this day to climb out of the canyon. The second was a slow
march of thirty miles into a scrub cedar and pinyon forest, through which
the great red and yellow walls of the canyon could be seen. That night
Slone found a water hole in a rocky pocket and a little grass for
Nagger. The third day's travel consisted of forty miles or more through
level pine forest, dry and odorous, but lacking the freshness and beauty
of the forest on the north side of the canyon. On this south side a
strange feature was that all the water, when there was any, ran away
from the rim. Slone camped this night at a muddy pond in the woods,
where Wildfire's tracks showed plainly.

On the following day Slone rode out of the forest into a country of
scanty cedars, bleached and stunted, and out of this to the edge of a
plateau, from which the shimmering desert flung its vast and desolate
distances, forbidding and menacing. This was not the desert upland
country of Utah, but a naked and bony world of colored rock and sand--a
painted desert of heat and wind and flying sand and waterless wastes and
barren ranges. But it did not daunt Slone. For far down on the bare,
billowing ridges moved a red speck, at a snail's pace, a slowly moving
dot of color which was Wildfire.

       *       *       *       *       *

On open ground like this, Nagger, carrying two hundred and fifty pounds,
showed his wonderful quality. He did not mind the heat nor the sand nor
the glare nor the distance nor his burden. He did not tire. He was an
engine of tremendous power.

Slone gained upon Wildfire, and toward evening of that day he reached to
within half a mile of the stallion. And he chose to keep that far
behind. That night he camped where there was dry grass, but no water.

Next day he followed Wildfire down and down, over the endless swell of
rolling red ridges, bare of all but bleached white grass and meager
greasewood, always descending in the face of that painted desert of bold
and ragged steppes. Slone made fifty miles that day, and gained the
valley bed, where a slender stream ran thin and spread over a wide sandy
bottom. It was salty water, but it was welcome to both man and beast.

The following day he crossed, and the tracks of Wildfire were still wet
on the sand bars. The stallion was slowing down. Slone saw him, limping
along, not far in advance. There was a ten-mile stretch of level ground,
blown hard as rock, from which the sustenance had been bleached, for not
a spear of grass grew there. And following that was a tortuous passage
through a weird region of clay dunes, blue and violet and heliotrope and
lavender, all worn smooth by rain and wind. Wildfire favored the soft
ground now. He had deviated from his straight course. And he was partial
to washes and dips in the earth where water might have lodged. And he
was not now scornful of a green-scummed water hole with its white margin
of alkali. That night Slone made camp with Wildfire in plain sight. The
stallion stopped when his pursuers stopped. And he began to graze on the
same stretch with Nagger. How strange this seemed to Slone!

Here at this camp was evidence of Indians. Wildfire had swung round to
the north in his course. Like any pursued wild animal, he had begun to
circle. And he had pointed his nose toward the Utah he had left.

Next morning Wildfire was not in sight, but he had left his tracks in
the sand. Slone trailed him with Nagger at a trot. Toward the head of
this sandy flat Slone came upon old cornfields, and a broken dam where
the water had been stored, and well-defined trails leading away to the
right. Somewhere over there in the desert lived Indians. At this point
Wildfire abandoned the trail he had followed for many days and cut out
more to the north. It took all the morning hours to climb three great
steppes and benches that led up to the summit of a mesa, vast in extent.
It turned out to be a sandy waste. The wind rose and everywhere were
moving sheets of sand, and in the distance circular yellow dust devils,
rising high like water spouts, and back down in the sun-scorched valley
a sandstorm moved along majestically, burying the desert in its yellow
pall.

Then two more days of sand and another day of a slowly rising ground
growing from bare to gray and gray to green, and then to the purple of
sage and cedar--these three grinding days were toiled out with only one
water hole.

And Wildfire was lame and in distress and Nagger was growing gaunt and
showing strain; and Slone, haggard and black and worn, plodded miles and
miles on foot to save his horse.

Slone felt that it would be futile to put the chase to a test of speed.
Nagger could never head that stallion. Slone meant to go on and on,
always pushing Wildfire, keeping him tired, wearied, and worrying him,
till a section of the country was reached where he could drive Wildfire
into some kind of a natural trap. The pursuit seemed endless. Wildfire
kept to open country where he could not be surprised.

There came a morning when Slone climbed to a cedared plateau that rose
for a whole day's travel, and then split into a labyrinthine maze of
canyons. There were trees, grass, water. It was a high country, cool and
wild, like the uplands he had left. For days he camped on Wildfire's
trail, always relentlessly driving him, always watching for the trap he
hoped to find. And the red stallion spent much of this time of flight in
looking backward. Whenever Slone came in sight of him he had his head
over his shoulder, watching. And on the soft ground of these canyons he
had begun to recover from his lameness. But this did not worry Slone.
Sooner or later Wildfire would go down into a high-walled wash, from
which there would be no outlet; or he would wander into a box canyon; or
he would climb out on a mesa with no place to descend, unless he passed
Slone; or he would get cornered on a soft, steep slope where his hoofs
would sink deep and make him slow. The nature of the desert had changed.
Slone had entered a wonderful region, the like of which he had not
seen--a high plateau criss-crossed in every direction by narrow canyons
with red walls a thousand feet high.

And one of the strange turning canyons opened into a vast valley of
monuments.

The plateau had weathered and washed away, leaving huge sections of
stone walls, all standing isolated, different in size and shape, but all
clean-cut, bold, with straight lines. They stood up everywhere,
monumental, towering, many-colored, lending a singular and beautiful
aspect to the great green and gray valley, billowing away to the north,
where dim, broken battlements mounted to the clouds.

The only living thing in Slone's sight was Wildfire. He shone red down
on the green slope.

Slone's heart swelled. This was the setting for that grand horse--a
perfect wild range. But also it seemed the last place where there might
be any chance to trap the stallion. Still that did not alter Slone's
purpose, though it lost to him the joy of former hopes. He rode down the
slope, out upon the billowing floor of the valley. Wildfire looked back
to see his pursuers, and then the solemn stillness broke to a wild,
piercing whistle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day after day, camping where night found him, Slone followed the
stallion, never losing sight of him till darkness had fallen. The valley
was immense and the monuments miles apart. But they always seemed close
together and near him. The air magnified everything. Slone lost track of
time. The strange, solemn, lonely days and the silent, lonely nights,
and the endless pursuit, and the wild, weird valley--these completed the
work of years on Slone and he became satisfied, unthinking, almost
savage.

The toil and privation had worn him down and he was like iron. His
garments hung in tatters; his boots were ripped and soleless. Long since
his flour had been used up, and all his supplies except the salt. He
lived on the meat of rabbits, but they were scarce, and the time came
when there were none. Some days he did not eat. Hunger did not make him
suffer. He killed a desert bird now and then, and once a wildcat
crossing the valley. Eventually he felt his strength diminishing, and
then he took to digging out the pack rats and cooking them. But these,
too, were scarce. At length starvation faced Slone. But he knew he would
not starve. Many times he had been within rifle shot of Wildfire. And
the grim, forbidding thought grew upon him that he must kill the
stallion. The thought seemed involuntary, but his mind rejected it.
Nevertheless, he knew that if he could not catch the stallion he would
kill him. That had been the end of many a desperate rider's pursuit of a
coveted horse.

While Slone kept on his merciless pursuit, never letting Wildfire rest
by day, time went on just as relentlessly. Spring gave way to early
summer. The hot sun bleached the grass; water holes failed out in the
valley, and water could be found only in the canyons; and the dry winds
began to blow the sand. It was a sandy valley, green and gray only at a
distance, and out toward the north there were no monuments, and the slow
heave of sand lifted toward the dim walls.

Wildfire worked away from this open valley, back to the south end, where
the great monuments loomed, and still farther back, where they grew
closer, till at length some of them were joined by weathered ridges to
the walls of the surrounding plateau. For all that Slone could see,
Wildfire was in perfect condition. But Nagger was not the horse he had
been. Slone realized that in one way or another the pursuit was
narrowing down to the end.

He found a water hole at the head of a wash in a split in the walls, and
here he let Nagger rest and graze one whole day--the first day for a
long time that he had not kept the red stallion in sight. That day was
marked by the good fortune of killing a rabbit, and while eating it his
gloomy, fixed mind admitted that he was starving. He dreaded the next
sunrise. But he could not hold it back. There, behind the dark
monuments, standing sentinel-like, the sky lightened and reddened and
burnt into gold and pink, till out of the golden glare the sun rose
glorious. And Slone, facing the league-long shadows of the monuments,
rode out again into the silent, solemn day, on his hopeless quest.

For a change Wildfire had climbed high up a slope of talus, through a
narrow pass, rounded over with drifting sand. And Slone gazed down into
a huge amphitheater full of monuments, like all that strange country. A
basin three miles across lay beneath him. Walls and weathered slants of
rock and steep slopes of reddish-yellow sand inclosed this oval
depression. The floor was white, and it seemed to move gently or radiate
with heat waves. Studying it, Slone made out that the motion was caused
by wind in long bleached grass. He had crossed small areas of this grass
in different parts of the region.

Wildfire's tracks led down into this basin, and presently Slone, by
straining his eyes, made out the red spot that was the stallion.

"He's lookin' to quit the country," soliloquized Slone, as he surveyed
the scene.

With keen, slow gaze Slone studied the lay of wall and slope, and when
he had circled the huge depression he made sure that Wildfire could not
get out except by the narrow pass through which he had gone in. Slone
sat astride Nagger in the mouth of this pass--a wash a few yards wide,
walled by broken, rough rock on one side and an insurmountable slope on
the other.

"If this hole was only little, now," sighed Slone, as he gazed at the
sweeping, shimmering oval floor, "I might have a chance. But down
there--we couldn't get near him."

There was no water in that dry bowl. Slone reflected on the uselessness
of keeping Wildfire down there, because Nagger could not go without
water as long as Wildfire. For the first time Slone hesitated. It seemed
merciless to Nagger to drive him down into this hot, windy hole. The
wind blew from the west, and it swooped up the slope, hot, with the odor
of dry, dead grass.

But that hot wind stirred Slone with an idea, and suddenly he was tense,
excited, glowing, yet grim and hard.

"Wildfire, I'll make you run with your namesake in that high grass,"
called Slone. The speech was full of bitter failure, of regret, of the
hardness of a rider who could not give up the horse to freedom.

Slone meant to ride down there and fire the long grass. In that wind
there would indeed be wildfire to race with the red stallion. It would
perhaps mean his death; at least it would chase him out of that hole,
where to follow him would be useless.

"I'd make you hump now to get away if I could get behind you," muttered
Slone. He saw that if he could fire the grass on the other side the wind
of flame would drive Wildfire straight toward him. The slopes and walls
narrowed up to the pass, but high grass grew to within a few rods of
where Slone stood. But it seemed impossible to get behind Wildfire.

"At night--then--I could get round him," said Slone, thinking hard and
narrowing his gaze to scan the circle of wall and slope. "Why not? . . .
No wind at night. That grass would burn slow till mornin'--till the wind
came up--an' it's been west for days."

Suddenly Slone began to pound the patient Nagger and to cry out to him
in wild exultance.

"Old horse, we've got him! We've got him! We'll put a rope on him before
this time to-morrow!"

Slone yielded to his strange, wild joy, but it did not last long, soon
succeeding to sober, keen thought. He rode down into the bowl a mile,
making absolutely certain that Wildfire could not climb out on that
side. The far end, beyond the monuments, was a sheer wall of rock. Then
he crossed to the left side. Here the sandy slope was almost too steep
for even him to go up. And there was grass that would burn. He returned
to the pass assured that Wildfire had at last fallen into a trap the
like Slone had never dreamed of. The great horse was doomed to run into
living flame or the whirling noose of a lasso.

Then Slone reflected. Nagger had that very morning had his fill of good
water--the first really satisfying drink for days. If he was rested that
day, on the morrow he would be fit for the grueling work possibly in
store for him. Slone unsaddled the horse and turned him loose, and with
a snort he made down the gentle slope for the grass. Then Slone carried
his saddle to a shady spot afforded by a slab of rock and a dwarf cedar,
and here he composed himself to rest and watch and think and wait.

Wildfire was plainly in sight no more than two miles away. Gradually he
was grazing along toward the monuments and the far end of the great
basin. Slone believed, because the place was so large, that Wildfire
thought there was a way out on the other side or over the slopes or
through the walls. Never before had the farsighted stallion made a
mistake. Slone suddenly felt the keen, stabbing fear of an outlet
somewhere. But it left him quickly. He had studied those slopes and
walls. Wildfire could not get out, except by the pass he had entered,
unless he could fly.

Slone lay in the shade, his head propped on his saddle, and while gazing
down into the shimmering hollow he began to plan. He calculated that he
must be able to carry fire swiftly across the far end of the basin, so
that he would not be absent long from the mouth of the pass. Fire was
always a difficult matter, since he must depend only on flint and steel.
He decided to wait till dark, build a fire with dead cedar sticks, and
carry a bundle of them with burning ends. He felt assured that the wind
caused by riding would keep them burning. After he had lighted the grass
all he had to do was to hurry back to his station and there await
developments.

The day passed slowly, and it was hot. The heat-waves rose in dark,
wavering lines and veils from the valley. The wind blew almost a gale.
Thin, curling sheets of sand blew up over the crests of the slopes, and
the sound it made was a soft, silken rustling, very low. The sky was a
steely blue above and copper close over the distant walls.

That afternoon, toward the close, Slone ate the last of the meat. At
sunset the wind died away and the air cooled. There was a strip of red
along the wall of rock and on the tips of the monuments, and it lingered
there for long, a strange, bright crown. Nagger was not far away, but
Wildfire had disappeared, probably behind one of the monuments.

When twilight fell Slone went down after Nagger and, returning with him,
put on bridle and saddle. Then he began to search for suitable sticks of
wood. Farther back in the pass he found stunted dead cedars, and from
these secured enough for his purpose. He kindled a fire and burned the
ends of the sticks into red embers. Making a bundle of these, he put
them under his arm, the dull, glowing ends backward, and then mounted
his horse.

It was just about dark when he faced down into the valley. When he
reached level ground he kept to the edge of the left slope and put
Nagger to a good trot. The grass and brush were scant here, and the
color of the sand was light, so he had no difficulty in traveling. From
time to time his horse went through grass, and its dry, crackling
rustle, showing how it would burn, was music to Slone. Gradually the
monuments began to loom up, bold and black against the blue sky, with
stars seemingly hanging close over them. Slone had calculated that the
basin was smaller than it really was, in both length and breadth. This
worried him. Wildfire might see or hear or scent him, and make a break
back to the pass and thus escape. Slone was glad when the huge, dark
monuments were indistinguishable from the black, frowning wall. He had
to go slower here, because of the darkness. But at last he reached the
slow rise of jumbled rock that evidently marked the extent of weathering
on that side. Here he turned to the right and rode out into the valley.
The floor was level and thickly overgrown with long, dead grass and dead
greasewood, as dry as tinder. It was easy to account for the dryness;
neither snow nor rain had visited that valley for many months. Slone
whipped one of the sticks in the wind and soon had the smouldering end
red and showering sparks. Then he dropped the stick in the grass, with
curious intent and a strange feeling of regret.

Instantly the grass blazed with a little sputtering roar. Nagger
snorted. "Wildfire!" exclaimed Slone. That word was a favorite one with
riders, and now Slone used it both to call out his menace to the
stallion and to express his feeling for that blaze, already running
wild.

Without looking back, Slone rode across the valley, dropping a glowing
stick every quarter of a mile. When he reached the other side there were
a dozen fires behind him, burning slowly, with white smoke rising
lazily. Then he loped Nagger along the side back to the sandy ascent,
and on up to the mouth of the pass. There he searched for tracks.
Wildfire had not gone out, and Slone experienced relief and exultation.
He took up a position in the middle of the narrowest part of the pass,
and there, with Nagger ready for anything, he once more composed himself
to watch and wait.

Far across the darkness of the valley, low down, twelve lines of fire,
widely separated, crept toward one another. They appeared thin and slow,
with only an occasional leaping flame. And some of the black spaces must
have been monuments, blotting out the creeping snail lines of red. Slone
watched, strangely fascinated.

"What do you think of that?" he said, aloud, and he meant his query for
Wildfire.

As he watched the lines perceptibly lengthened and brightened and pale
shadows of smoke began to appear. Over at the left of the valley the two
brightest fires, the first he had started, crept closer and closer
together. They seemed long in covering distance. But not a breath of
wind stirred, and besides they really might move swiftly, without
looking so to Slone. When the two lines met a sudden and larger blaze
rose.

"Ah!" said the rider, and then he watched the other lines creeping
together. How slowly fire moved, he thought. The red stallion would have
every chance to run between those lines, if he dared. But a wild horse
fears nothing like fire. This one would not run the gantlet of flames.
Nevertheless Slone felt more and more relieved as the lines closed. The
hours of the night dragged past until at length one long, continuous
line of fire spread level across the valley, its bright, red line broken
only where the monuments of stone were silhouetted against it.

The darkness of the valley changed. The light of the moon changed. The
radiance of the stars changed. Either the line of fire was finding
denser fuel to consume or it was growing appreciably closer, for the
flames began to grow, to leap, and to flare.

Slone strained his ears for the thud of hoofs on sand.

The time seemed endless in its futility of results, but fleeting after
it had passed; and he could tell how the hours fled by the
ever-recurring need to replenish the little fire he kept burning in the
pass.

A broad belt of valley grew bright in the light, and behind it loomed
the monuments, weird and dark, with columns of yellow and white smoke
wreathing them.

Suddenly Slone's sensitive ear vibrated to a thrilling sound. He leaned
down to place his ear to the sand. Rapid, rhythmic beat of hoofs made
him leap to his feet, reaching for his lasso with right hand and a gun
with his left.

Nagger lifted his head, sniffed the air, and snorted. Slone peered into
the black belt of gloom that lay below him. It would be hard to see a
horse there, unless he got high enough to be silhouetted against that
line of fire now flaring to the sky. But he heard the beat of hoofs,
swift, sharp, louder--louder. The night shadows were deceptive. That
wonderful light confused him, made the place unreal. Was he dreaming? Or
had the long chase and his privations unhinged his mind? He reached for
Nagger. No! The big black was real, alive, quivering, pounding the sand.
He scented an enemy.

Once more Slone peered down into the void or what seemed a void. But it,
too, had changed, lightened. The whole valley was brightening. Great
palls of curling smoke rose white and yellow, to turn back as the
monuments met their crests, and then to roll upward, blotting out the
stars. It was such a light as he had never seen, except in dreams. Pale
moonlight and dimmed starlight and wan dawn all vague and strange and
shadowy under the wild and vivid light of burning grass.

In the pale path before Slone, that fanlike slope of sand which opened
down into the valley, appeared a swiftly moving black object, like a
fleeing phantom. It was a phantom horse. Slone felt that his eyes,
deceived by his mind, saw racing images. Many a wild chase he had lived
in dreams on some far desert. But what was that beating in his
ears--sharp, swift, even, rhythmic? Never had his ears played him false.
Never had he heard things in his dreams. That running object was a horse
and he was coming like the wind. Slone felt something grip his heart.
All the time and endurance and pain and thirst and suspense and longing
and hopelessness--the agony of the whole endless chase--closed tight on
his heart in that instant.

The running horse halted just in the belt of light cast by the burning
grass. There he stood sharply defined, clear as a cameo, not a hundred
paces from Slone. It was Wildfire.

Slone uttered an involuntary cry. Thrill on thrill shot through him.
Delight and hope and fear and despair claimed him in swift, successive
flashes. And then again the ruling passion of a rider held him--the
sheer glory of a grand and unattainable horse. For Slone gave up
Wildfire in that splendid moment. How had he ever dared to believe he
could capture that wild stallion? Slone looked and looked, filling his
mind, regretting nothing, sure that the moment was reward for all he had
endured.

The weird lights magnified Wildfire and showed him clearly. He seemed
gigantic. He shone black against the fire. His head was high, his mane
flying. Behind him the fire flared and the valley-wide column of smoke
rolled majestically upward, and the great monuments seemed to retreat
darkly and mysteriously as the flames advanced beyond them. It was a
beautiful, unearthly spectacle, with its silence the strangest feature.

But suddenly Wildfire broke that silence with a whistle which to Slone's
overstrained faculties seemed a blast as piercing as the splitting sound
of lightning. And with the whistle Wildfire plunged up toward the pass.

Slone yelled at the top of his lungs and fired his gun before he could
terrorize the stallion and drive him back down the slope. Soon Wildfire
became again a running black object, and then he disappeared.

The great line of fire had gotten beyond the monuments and now stretched
unbroken across the valley from wall to slope. Wildfire could never
pierce that line of flames. And now Slone saw, in the paling sky to the
east, that dawn was at hand.


IV

Slone looked grimly glad when simultaneously with the first red flash of
sunrise a breeze fanned his cheek. All that was needed now was a west
wind. And here came the assurance of it.

The valley appeared hazy and smoky, with slow, rolling clouds low down
where the line of fire moved. The coming of daylight paled the blaze of
the grass, though here and there Slone caught flickering glimpses of
dull red flame. The wild stallion kept to the center of the valley,
restlessly facing this way and that, but never toward the smoke. Slone
made sure that Wildfire gradually gave ground as the line of smoke
slowly worked toward him.

Every moment the breeze freshened, grew steadier and stronger, until
Slone saw that it began to clear the valley of the low-hanging smoke.
There came a time when once more the blazing line extended across from
slope to slope.

Wildfire was cornered, trapped. Many times Slone nervously uncoiled and
recoiled his lasso. Presently the great chance of his life would
come--the hardest and most important throw he would ever have with a
rope. He did not miss often, but then he missed sometimes, and here he
must be swift and sure. It annoyed him that his hands perspired and
trembled and that something weighty seemed to obstruct his breathing. He
muttered that he was pretty much worn out, not in the best of condition
for a hard fight with a wild horse. Still he would capture Wildfire; his
mind was unalterably set there. He anticipated that the stallion would
make a final and desperate rush past him; and he had his plan of action
all outlined. What worried him was the possibility of Wildfire's doing
some unforeseen feat at the very last. Slone was prepared for hours of
strained watching, and then a desperate effort, and then a shock that
might kill Wildfire and cripple Nagger, or a long race and fight.

But he soon discovered that he was wrong about the long watch and wait.
The wind had grown strong and was driving the fire swiftly. The flames,
fanned by the breeze, leaped to a formidable barrier. In less than an
hour, though the time seemed only a few moments to the excited Slone,
Wildfire had been driven down toward the narrowing neck of the valley,
and he had begun to run, to and fro, back and forth. Any moment, then,
Slone expected him to grow terrorized and to come tearing up toward the
pass.

Wildfire showed evidence of terror, but he did not attempt to make the
pass. Instead he went at the right-hand slope of the valley and began to
climb. The slope was steep and soft, yet the stallion climbed up and up.
The dust flew in clouds; the gravel rolled down, and the sand followed
in long streams. Wildfire showed his keenness by zigzagging up the
slope.

"Go ahead, you red devil!" yelled Slone. He was much elated. In that
soft bank Wildfire would tire out while not hurting himself.

Slone watched the stallion in admiration and pity and exultation.
Wildfire did not make much headway, for he slipped back almost as much
as he gained. He attempted one place after another where he failed.
There was a bank of clay, some few feet high, and he could not round it
at either end or surmount it in the middle. Finally he literally pawed
and cut a path, much as if he were digging in the sand for water. When
he got over that he was not much better off. The slope above was endless
and grew steeper, more difficult toward the top. Slone knew absolutely
that no horse could climb over it. He grew apprehensive, however, for
Wildfire might stick up there on the slope until the line of fire
passed. The horse apparently shunned any near proximity to the fire, and
performed prodigious efforts to escape.

"He'll be ridin' an avalanche pretty soon," muttered Slone.

Long sheets of sand and gravel slid down to spill thinly over the low
bank. Wildfire, now sinking to his knees, worked steadily upward till he
had reached a point halfway up the slope, at the head of a long, yellow
bank of treacherous-looking sand. Here he was halted by a low bulge,
which he might have surmounted had his feet been free. But he stood deep
in the sand. For the first time he looked down at the sweeping fire, and
then at Slone.

Suddenly the bank of sand began to slide with him. He snorted in fright.
The avalanche started slowly and was evidently no mere surface slide. It
was deep. It stopped--then started again--and again stopped. Wildfire
appeared to be sinking deeper and deeper. His struggles only embedded
him more firmly. Then the bank of sand, with an ominous, low roar, began
to move once more. This time it slipped swiftly. The dust rose in a
cloud, almost obscuring the horse. Long streams of gravel rattled down,
and waterfalls of sand waved over the steppes of the slope.

Just as suddenly the avalanche stopped again. Slone saw, from the great
oval hole it had left above, that it was indeed deep. That was the
reason it did not slide readily. When the dust cleared away Slone saw
the stallion, sunk to his flanks in the sand, utterly helpless.

With a wild whoop Slone leaped off Nagger, and, a lasso in each hand, he
ran down the long bank. The fire was perhaps a quarter of a mile
distant, and, since the grass was thinning out, it was not coming so
fast as it had been. The position of the stallion was halfway between
the fire and Slone, and a hundred yards up the slope.

Like a madman Slone climbed up through the dragging, loose sand. He was
beside himself with a fury of excitement. He fancied his eyes were
failing him, that it was not possible the great horse really was up
there, helpless in the sand. Yet every huge stride Slone took brought
him closer to a fact he could not deny. In his eagerness he slipped, and
fell, and crawled, and leaped, until he reached the slide which held
Wildfire prisoner.

The stallion might have been fast in quicksand, up to his body, for all
the movement he could make. He could move only his head. He held that
up, his eyes wild, showing the whites, his foaming mouth wide open, his
teeth gleaming. A sound like a scream rent the air. Terrible fear and
hate were expressed in that piercing neigh. And shaggy, wet, dusty red,
with all of brute savageness in the look and action of his head, he
appeared hideous.

As Slone leaped within roping distance the avalanche slipped a foot or
two, halted, slipped once more, and slowly started again with that low
roar. He did not care whether it slipped or stopped. Like a wolf he
leaped closer, whirling his rope. The loop hissed round his head and
whistled as he flung it. And when fiercely he jerked back on the rope,
the noose closed tight round Wildfire's neck.

"I--got--a rope--on him!" cried Slone, in hoarse pants.

He stared, unbelieving. It was unreal, that sight--unreal like the slow,
grinding movement of the avalanche under him. Wildfire's head seemed a
demon head of hate. It reached out, mouth agape, to bite, to rend. That
horrible scream could not be the scream of a horse.

Slone was a wild-horse hunter, a rider, and when that second of
incredulity flashed by, then came the moment of triumph. No moment could
ever equal that one, when he realized he stood there with a rope around
that grand stallion's neck. All the days and the miles and the toil and
the endurance and the hopelessness and the hunger were paid for in that
moment. His heart seemed too large for his breast.

"I tracked--you!" he cried, savagely. "I stayed--with you! An' I got a
rope--on you! An'--I'll ride you--you red devil!"

The passion of the man was intense. That endless, racking pursuit had
brought out all the hardness the desert had engendered in him. Almost
hate, instead of love, spoke in Slone's words. He hauled on the lasso,
pulling the stallion's head down and down. The action was the lust of
capture as well as the rider's instinctive motive to make the horse fear
him. Life was unquenchably wild and strong in that stallion; it showed
in the terror which made him hideous. And man and beast somehow
resembled each other in that moment which was inimical to noble life.

The avalanche slipped with little jerks, as if treacherously loosing its
hold for a long plunge. The line of fire below ate at the bleached grass
and the long column of smoke curled away on the wind.

Slone held the taut lasso with his left hand, and with the right he
swung the other rope, catching the noose round Wildfire's nose. Then
letting go of the first rope he hauled on the other, pulling the head of
the stallion far down. Hand over hand Slone closed in on the horse. He
leaped on Wildfire's head, pressed it down, and, holding it down on the
sand with his knees, with swift fingers he tied the nose in a
hackamore--an improvised halter. Then, just as swiftly, he bound his
scarf tight round Wildfire's head, blindfolding him.

"All so easy!" exclaimed Slone, under his breath. "Who would believe it!
Is it a dream?"

He rose and let the stallion have a free head.

"Wildfire, I got a rope on you--an' a hackamore--an' a blinder," said
Slone. "An' if I had a bridle I'd put that on you. Who'd ever believe
you'd catch yourself, draggin' in the sand?"

Slone, finding himself falling on the sand, grew alive to the augmented
movement of the avalanche. It had begun to slide, to heave and bulge and
crack. Dust rose in clouds from all around. The sand appeared to open
and let him sink to his knees. The rattle of gravel was drowned in a
soft roar. Then he shot down swiftly, holding the lassos, keeping
himself erect, and riding as if in a boat. He felt the successive
steppes of the slope, and then the long incline below, and then the
checking and rising and spreading of the avalanche as it slowed down on
the level. All movement then was checked violently. He appeared to be
half buried in sand. While he struggled to extricate himself the thick
dust blew away and, settled so that he could see. Wildfire lay before
him, at the edge of the slide, and now he was not so deeply embedded as
he had been up on the slope. He was struggling and probably soon would
have been able to get out. The line of fire was close now, but Slone did
not fear that.

At his shrill whistle Nagger bounded toward him, obedient, but snorting,
with ears laid back. He halted. A second whistle started him again.
Slone finally dug himself out of the sand, pulled the lassos out, and
ran the length of them toward Nagger. The black showed both fear and
fight. His eyes rolled and he half shied away.

"Come on!" called Slone, harshly.

He got a hand on the horse, pulled him round, and, mounting in a flash,
wound both lassos round the pommel of the saddle.

"Haul him out, Nagger, old boy!" cried Slone, and he dug spurs into the
black.

One plunge of Nagger's slid the stallion out of the sand. Snorting,
wild, blinded, Wildfire got up, shaking in every limb. He could not see
his enemies. The blowing smoke, right in his nose, made scent
impossible. But in the taut lassos he sensed the direction of his
captors. He plunged, rearing at the end of the plunge, and struck out
viciously with his hoofs. Slone, quick with spur and bridle, swerved
Nagger aside and Wildfire, off his balance, went down with a crash.
Slone dragged him, stretched him out, pulled him over twice before he
got forefeet planted. Once up, he reared again, screeching his rage,
striking wildly with his hoofs. Slone wheeled aside and toppled him over
again.

"Wildfire, it's no fair fight," he called, grimly. "But you led me a
chase. An' you learn right now I'm boss!"

FOOTNOTE:

[2] From _Wildfire_. Copyright, 1916, by Harper and Brothers, New York
and London. Reprinted by special permission of author and publisher.




[Illustration]




III.--The Hydrophobic Skunk[3]

_By Irvin S. Cobb_


THE Hydrophobic Skunk resides at the extreme bottom of the Grand canyon
and, next to a Southern Republican who never asked for a Federal office,
is the rarest of living creatures. He is so rare that nobody ever saw
him--that is, nobody except a native. I met plenty of tourists who had
seen people who had seen him, but never a tourist who had seen him with
his own eyes. In addition to being rare, he is highly gifted.

I think almost anybody will agree with me that the common, ordinary
skunk has been most richly dowered by Nature. To adorn a skunk with any
extra qualifications seems as great a waste of the raw material as
painting the lily or gilding refined gold. He is already amply equipped
for outdoor pursuits. Nobody intentionally shoves him round; everybody
gives him as much room as he seems to need. He commands respect--nay,
more than that, respect and veneration--wherever he goes. Joy riders
never run him down and foot passengers avoid crowding him into a corner.
You would think Nature had done amply well by the skunk; but no--the
Hydrophobic Skunk comes along and upsets all these calculations. Besides
carrying the traveling credentials of an ordinary skunk, he is rabid in
the most rabidissimus form. He is not mad just part of the time, like
one's relatives by marriage--and not mad most of the time, like the
old-fashioned railroad ticket agent--but mad all the time--incurably,
enthusiastically and unanimously mad! He is mad and he is glad of it.

We made the acquaintance of the Hydrophobic Skunk when we rode down
Hermit Trail. The casual visitor to the Grand canyon first of all takes
the rim drive; then he essays Bright Angel Trail, which is sufficiently
scary for his purposes until he gets used to it; and after that he grows
more adventurous and tackles Hermit Trail, which is a marvel of
corkscrew convolutions, gimleting its way down this red abdominal wound
of a canyon to the very gizzard of the world. Here, Johnny, our guide,
felt moved to speech, and we hearkened to his words and hungered for
more, for Johnny knows the ranges of the Northwest as a city dweller
knows his own little side street. In the fall of the year Johnny comes
down to the canyon and serves as a guide a while; and then, when he gets
so he just can't stand associating with tourists any longer, he packs
his war bags and journeys back to the Northern Range and enjoys the
company of cows a spell. Cows are not exactly exciting, but they don't
ask fool questions.

A highly competent young person is Johnny and a cow-puncher of parts.
Most of the canyon guides are cow-punchers--accomplished ones, too, and
of high standing in the profession. With a touch of reverence Johnny
pointed out to us Sam Scovel, the greatest bronco buster of his time,
now engaged in piloting tourists.

"Can he ride?" echoed Johnny in answer to our question. "Scovel could
ride an earthquake if she stood still long enough for him to mount! He
rode Steamboat--not Young Steamboat, but Old Steamboat! He rode Rocking
Chair, and he's the only man that ever did that and was not called on in
a couple of days to attend his own funeral."

We went on and on at a lazy mule trot, hearing the unwritten annals of
the range from one who had seen them enacted at first hand. Pretty soon
we passed a herd of burros with mealy, dusty noses and spotty hides,
feeding on prickly pears and rock lichens; and just before sunset we
slid down the last declivity out upon the plateau and came to a camp as
was a camp!

This was roughing it de luxe with a most de-luxey vengeance! Here were
three tents, or rather three canvas houses, with wooden half walls; and
they were spick-and-span inside and out, and had glass windows in them
and doors and matched wooden floors. . . . The mess tent was provided
with a table with a clean cloth to go over it, and there were china
dishes and china cups and shiny knives, forks and spoons. . . . Bill was
in charge of the camp--a dark, rangy, good-looking leading man of a
cowboy, wearing his blue shirt and his red neckerchief with an air.

That Johnny certainly could cook! Served on china dishes upon a
cloth-covered table, we had mounds of fried steaks and shoals of fried
bacon; and a bushel, more or less, of sheepherder potatoes; and green
peas and sliced peaches out of cans; and sour-dough biscuits as light as
kisses and much more filling; and fresh butter and fresh milk; and
coffee as black as your hat and strong as sin. How easy it is for
civilized man to become primitive and comfortable in his way of eating,
especially if he has just ridden ten miles on a buckboard and nine more
on a mule and is away down at the bottom of the Grand canyon--and there
is nobody to look on disapprovingly when he takes a bite that would be a
credit to a steam shovel!

Despite all reports to the contrary, I wish to state that it is no
trouble at all to eat green peas off a knife-blade--you merely mix them
in with potatoes for a cement; and fried steak--take it from an old
steak eater--tastes best when eaten with those tools of Nature's own
providing, both hands and your teeth. An hour passed--busy, yet
pleasant--and we were both gorged to the gills and had reared back with
our cigars lit to enjoy a third jorum of black coffee apiece, when
Johnny, speaking in an offhand way to Bill, who was still hiding away
biscuits inside of himself like a parlor prestidigitator, said:

"Seen any of them old Hydrophobies the last day or two?"

"Not so many," said Bill casually. "There was a couple out last night
pirootin' round in the moonlight. I reckon, though, there'll be quite a
flock of 'em out to-night. A new moon always seems to fetch 'em up from
the river."

Both of us quit blowing on our coffee and we put the cups down. I think
I was the one who spoke.

"I beg your pardon," I asked, "but what did you say would be out
to-night?"

"We were just speakin' to one another about them Hydrophoby Skunks,"
said Bill apologetically. "This here canyon is where they mostly hang out
and frolic 'round."

I laid down my cigar, too. I admit I was interested.

"Oh!" I said softly--like that. "Is it? Do they?"

"Yes," said Johnny. "I reckin there's liable to be one come shovin' his
old nose into that door any minute. Or probably two--they mostly travels
in pairs--sets, as you might say."

"You'd know one the minute you saw him, though," said Bill. "They're
smaller than a regular skunk and spotted where the other kind is
striped. And they got little red eyes. You won't have no trouble at all
recognizin' one."

It was at this juncture that we both got up and moved back by the stove.
It was warmer there and the chill of evening seemed to be settling down
noticeably.

"Funny thing about Hydrophoby Skunks," went on Johnny after a moment of
pensive thought--"mad, you know!"

"What makes them mad?" The two of us asked the question together.

"Born that way!" explained Bill--"mad from the start, and won't never do
nothin' to get shut of it."

"Ahem--they never attack humans, I suppose?"

"Don't they?" said Johnny, as if surprised at such ignorance. "Why,
humans is their favorite pastime! Humans is just pie to a Hydrophoby
Skunk. It ain't really any fun to be bit by a Hydrophoby Skunk neither."
He raised his coffee cup to his lips and imbibed deeply.

"Which you certainly said something then, Johnny," stated Bill. "You
see," he went on, turning to us, "they aim to catch you asleep and they
creep up right soft and take holt of you--take holt of a year
usually--and clamp their teeth and just hang on for further orders. Some
says they hang on till it thunders, same as snappin' turtles. But that's
a lie, I judge, because there's weeks on a stretch down here when it
don't thunder. All the cases I ever heard of they let go at sunup."

"It is right painful at the time," said Johnny, taking up the thread of
the narrative; "and then in nine days you go mad yourself. Remember that
fellow the Hydrophoby Skunk bit down here by the rapids, Bill? Let's see
now--what was that hombre's name?"

"Williams," supplied Bill--"Heck Williams. I saw him at Flagstaff when
they took him there to the hospital. That guy certainly did carry on
regardless. First he went mad and his eyes turned red, and he got so he
didn't have no real use for water--well, them prospectors don't never
care much about water anyway--and then he got to snappin' and bitin' and
foamin' so's they had to strap him down to his bed. He got loose
though."

"Broke loose, I suppose?" I said.

"No, he bit loose," said Bill with the air of one who would not deceive
you even in a matter of small details.

"Do you mean to say he bit those leather straps in two?"

"No, sir; he couldn't reach them," explained Bill, "so he bit the bed in
two. Not in one bite, of course," he went on. "It took him several. I
saw him after he was laid out. He really wasn't no credit to himself as
a corpse."

I'm not sure, but I think my companion and I were holding hands by now.
Outside we could hear that little lost echo laughing to itself. It was
no time to be laughing either. Under certain circumstances I don't know
of a lonelier place anywhere on earth than that Grand canyon.

Presently my friend spoke, and it seemed to me his voice was a mite
husky. Well, he had a bad cold.

"You said they mostly attack persons who are sleeping out, didn't you?"

"That's right, too," said Johnny, and Bill nodded in affirmation.

"Then, of course, since we sleep indoors everything will be all right,"
I put in.

"Well, yes and no," answered Johnny. "In the early part of the evening a
Hydrophoby is liable to do a lot of prowlin' round outdoors; but toward
mornin' they like to get into camps--they dig up under the side walls or
come up through the floor--and they seem to prefer to get in bed with
you. They're cold-blooded, I reckin, same as rattlesnakes. Cool nights
always do drive 'em in, seems like."

"It's going to be sort of coolish to-night," said Bill casually.

It certainly was. I don't remember a chillier night in years. My teeth
were chattering a little--from cold--before we turned in. I retired with
all my clothes on, including my boots and leggings, and I wished I had
brought along my ear muffs. I also buttoned my watch into my lefthand
shirt pocket, the idea being if for any reason I should conclude to move
during the night I would be fully equipped for traveling. The door would
not stay closely shut--the door-jamb had sagged a little and the wind
kept blowing the door ajar. But after a while we dozed off.

It was one twenty-seven A. M. when I woke with a violent start. I know
this was the exact time because that was when my watch stopped. I peered
about me in the darkness. The door was wide open--I could tell that.
Down on the floor there was a dragging, scuffling sound, and from almost
beneath me a pair of small red eyes peered up phosphorescently.

"He's here!" I said to my companion as I emerged from my blankets; and
he, waking instantly, seemed instinctively to know whom I meant. I used
to wonder at the ease with which a cockroach can climb a perfectly
smooth wall and run across the ceiling. I know now that to do this is
the easiest thing in the world--if you have the proper incentive behind
you. I had gone up one wall of the tent and had crossed over and was in
the act of coming down the other side when Bill burst in, his eyes
blurred with sleep, a lighted lamp in one hand and a gun in the other.

I never was so disappointed in my life because it wasn't a Hydrophobic
Skunk at all. It was a pack rat, sometimes called a trade rat, paying us
a visit. The pack or trade rat is also a denizen of the Grand canyon. He
is about four times as big as an ordinary rat and has an appetite to
correspond. He sometimes invades your camp and makes free with your
things, but he never steals anything outright--he merely trades with
you; hence his name. He totes off a side of meat or a bushel of meal and
brings a cactus stalk in; or he will confiscate your saddlebags and
leave you in exchange a nice dry chip. He is honest, but from what I can
gather he never gets badly stuck on a deal.

Next morning at breakfast Johnny and Bill were doing a lot of laughing
between them over something or other.

FOOTNOTE:

[3] From _Roughing It de Luxe_. Copyright, 1914, by George H. Doran
Company. Reprinted by special permission of author and publisher.




[Illustration]




IV.--The Ole Virginia[4]

_By Stewart Edward White_


THE ring around the sun had thickened all day long, and the turquoise
blue of the Arizona sky had filmed. Storms in the dry countries are
infrequent, but heavy; and this surely meant storm. We had ridden since
sunup over broad mesas, down and out of deep canyons, along the base of
the mountains in the wildest parts of the territory. The cattle were
winding leisurely toward the high country; the jack rabbits had
disappeared; the quail lacked; we did not see a single antelope in the
open.

"It's a case of hold up," the Cattleman ventured his opinion. "I have a
ranch over in the Double R. Charley and Windy Bill hold it down. We'll
tackle it. What do you think?"

The four cowboys agreed. We dropped into a low, broad watercourse,
ascended its bed to big cottonwoods and flowing water, followed it into
box canyons between rim rock carved fantastically and painted like a
Moorish facade, until at last in a widening below a rounded hill, we
came upon an adobe house, a fruit tree, and a round corral. This was the
Double R.

Charley and Windy Bill welcomed us with soda biscuits. We turned our
horses out, spread our beds on the floor, filled our pipes, and squatted
on our heels. Various dogs of various breeds investigated us. It was
very pleasant, and we did not mind the ring around the sun.

"Somebody else coming," announced the Cattleman finally.

"Uncle Jim," said Charley, after a glance.

A hawk-faced old man with a long white beard and long white hair rode
out from the cottonwoods. He had on a battered broad hat abnormally high
of crown, carried across his saddle a heavy "eight square" rifle, and
was followed by a half-dozen lolloping hounds.

The largest and fiercest of the latter, catching sight of our group,
launched himself with lightning rapidity at the biggest of the ranch
dogs, promptly nailed that canine by the back of the neck, shook him
violently a score of times, flung him aside, and pounced on the next.
During the ensuing few moments that hound was the busiest thing in the
West. He satisfactorily whipped four dogs, pursued two cats up a tree,
upset the Dutch oven and the rest of the soda biscuits, stampeded the
horses, and raised a cloud of dust adequate to represent the smoke of
battle. We others were too paralyzed to move. Uncle Jim sat placidly on
his white horse, his thin knees bent to the ox-bow stirrups, smoking.

In ten seconds the trouble was over, principally because there was no
more trouble to make. The hound returned leisurely, licking from his
chops the hair of his victims. Uncle Jim shook his head.

"Trailer," said he sadly, "is a little severe."

We agreed heartily, and turned in to welcome Uncle Jim with a fresh
batch of soda biscuits.

The old man was one of the typical "long hairs." He had come to the
Galiuro Mountains in '69, and since '69 he had remained in the Galiuro
Mountains, spite of man or the devil. At present he possessed some
hundreds of cattle, which he was reputed to water, in a dry season, from
an ordinary dish pan. In times past he had prospected.

That evening, the severe Trailer having dropped to slumber, he held
forth on big-game hunting and dogs, quartz claims and Apaches.

"Did you ever have any very close calls?" I asked.

He ruminated a few moments, refilled his pipe with some awful tobacco,
and told the following experience:

"In the time of Geronimo I was living just about where I do now; and
that was just about in line with the raiding. You see, Geronimo, and Ju,
and old Loco used to pile out of the reservation at Camp Apache, raid
south to the line, slip over into Mexico when the soldiers got too
promiscuous, and raid there until they got ready to come back. Then
there was always a big medicine talk. Says Geronimo:

"'I am tired of the warpath. I will come back from Mexico with all my
warriors, if you will escort me with soldiers and protect my people.'

"'All right,' says the General, being only too glad to get him back at
all.

"So, then, in ten minutes there wouldn't be a buck in camp, but next
morning they shows up again, each with about fifty head of hosses.

"'Where'd you get those hosses?' asks the General, suspicious.

"'Had 'em pastured in the hills,' answers Geronimo.

"'I can't take all those hosses with me; I believe they're stolen!' says
the General.

"'My people cannot go without their hosses,' says Geronimo.

"So, across the line they goes, and back to the reservation. In about a
week there's fifty-two frantic Greasers wanting to know where's their
hosses. The army is nothing but an importer of stolen stock, and knows
it, and can't help it.

"Well, as I says, I'm between Camp Apache and the Mexican line, so that
every raiding party goes right on past me. The point is that I'm a
thousand feet or so above the valley, and the renegades is in such a
hurry about that time that they never stop to climb up and collect me.
Often I've watched them trailing down the valley in a cloud of dust.
Then, in a day or two, a squad of soldiers would come up and camp at my
spring for a while. They used to send soldiers to guard every water hole
in the country so the renegades couldn't get water. After a while, from
not being bothered none, I got to thinking I wasn't worth while with
them.

"Me and Johnny Hooper were pecking away at the Ole Virginia mine then.
We'd got down about sixty feet, all timbered, and was thinking of
crosscutting. One day Johnny went to town, and that same day I got in a
hurry and left my gun at camp.

"I worked all the morning down at the bottom of the shaft, and when I
see by the sun it was getting along towards noon, I put in three good
shots, tamped 'em down, lit the fuses, and started to climb out.

"It ain't noways pleasant to light a fuse in a shaft, and then have to
climb out a fifty-foot ladder, with it burning behind you. I never did
get used to it. You keep thinking, 'Now, suppose there's a flaw in that
fuse, or something, and she goes off in six seconds instead of two
minutes? Where'll you be then?' It would give you a good boost towards
your home on high, anyway.

"So I climbed fast, and stuck my head out the top without looking--and
then I froze solid enough. There, about fifty feet away, climbing up
the hill on mighty tired hosses, was a dozen of the ugliest Chiricahuas
you ever don't want to meet, and in addition a Mexican renegade named
Maria, who was worse than any of 'em. I see at once their hosses was
tired out, and they had a notion of camping at my water hole, not
knowing nothing about the Ole Virginia mine.

"For two bits I'd have let go all holts and dropped backwards, trusting
to my thick head for easy lighting. Then I heard a little fizz and
sputter from below. At that my hair riz right up so I could feel the
breeze blow under my hat. For about six seconds I stood there like an
imbecile, grinning amiably. Then one of the Chiricahuas made a sort of
grunt, and I sabed that they'd seen the original exhibit your Uncle Jim
was making of himself.

"Then that fuse gave another sputter and one of the Apaches said, 'Un
dah.' That means 'white man.' It was harder to turn my head than if I'd
had a stiff neck; but I managed to do it, and I see that my ore dump
wasn't more than ten foot away. I mighty near overjumped it; and the
next I knew I was on one side of it and those Apaches on the other.
Probably I flew; leastways I don't seem to remember jumping.

"That didn't seem to do me much good. The renegades were grinning and
laughing to think how easy a thing they had; and I couldn't rightly
think up any arguments against the notion--at least from their
standpoint. They were chattering away to each other in Mexican for the
benefit of Maria. Oh, they had me all distributed, down to my suspender
buttons! And me squatting behind that ore dump about as formidable as a
brush rabbit!

"Then, all at once, one of my shots went off down in the shaft.

"'Boom!' says she, plenty big; and a slather of rocks and stones come
out of the mouth, and began to dump down promiscuous on the scenery. I
got one little one in the shoulder blade, and found time to wish my ore
dump had a roof. But those renegades caught it square in the thick of
trouble. One got knocked out entirely for a minute, by a nice piece of
country rock in the head.

"'Otra vez!' yells I, which means 'again.'

"'Boom!' goes the Ole Virginia prompt as an answer.

"I put in my time dodging, but when I gets a chance to look, the Apaches
has all got to cover and is looking scared.

"'Otra vez!' yells I again.

"'Boom!' says the Ole Virginia.

"This was the biggest shot of the lot, and she surely cut loose. I ought
to have been halfway up the hill watching things from a safe distance,
but I wasn't. Lucky for me the shaft was a little on the drift, so she
didn't quite shoot my way. But she distributed about a ton over those
renegades. They sort of half got to their feet uncertain.

"'Otra vez!' yells I once more, as bold as if I could keep her shooting
all day.

"It was just a cold, raw blazer; and if it didn't go through I could see
me as an Apache parlor ornament. But it did. Those Chiricahuas give one
yell and skipped. It was surely a funny sight, after they got aboard
their war ponies, to see them trying to dig out on horses too tired to
trot.

"I didn't stop to get all the laughs, though. In fact, I give one jump
off that ledge, and I lit a-running. A quarter-hoss couldn't have beat
me to that shack. There I grabbed my good old gun, old Meat-in-the-pot,
and made a climb for the tall country."

Uncle Jim stopped with an air of finality, and began lazily to refill
his pipe. From the open mud fireplace he picked a coal. Outside, the
rain, faithful to the prophecy of the wide-ringed sun, beat fitfully
against the roof.

"That was the closest call I ever had," said he at last.

FOOTNOTE:

[4] From _Arizona Nights_. Reprinted by special permission of publisher
and author. Copyright, 1907, by Doubleday, Page and Company.




[Illustration]




V.--The Weight of Obligation[5]

_By Rex Beach_


THIS is the story of a burden, the tale of a load that irked a strong
man's shoulders. To those who do not know the North it may seem strange,
but to those who understand the humors of men in solitude, and the
extravagant vagaries that steal in upon their minds, as fog drifts with
the night, it will not appear unusual. There are spirits in the
wilderness, eerie forces which play pranks; some droll or whimsical,
others grim.

Johnny Cantwell and Mortimer Grant were partners, trail mates, brothers
in soul if not in blood. The ebb and flood of frontier life had brought
them together, its hardships had united them until they were as one.
They were something of a mystery to each other, neither having
surrendered all his confidence, and because of this they retained their
mutual attraction. They had met by accident, but they remained together
by desire.

The spirit of adventure bubbled merrily within them, and it led them
into curious byways. It was this which sent them northward from the
States in the dead of winter, on the heels of the Stony River strike; it
was this which induced them to land at Katmai instead of Illiamna,
whither their land journey should have commenced.

"There are two routes over the coast range," the captain of the _Dora_
told them, "and only two. Illiamna Pass is low and easy, but the
distance is longer than by way of Katmai. I can land you at either
place."

"Katmai is pretty tough, isn't it?" Grant inquired.

"We've understood it's the worst pass in Alaska." Cantwell's eyes were
eager.

"It's awful! Nobody travels it except natives, and they don't like it.
Now, Illiamna--"

"We'll try Katmai. Eh, Mort?"

"Sure! They don't come hard enough for us, Cap. We'll see if it's as bad
as it's painted."

So, one gray January morning they were landed on a frozen beach, their
outfit was flung ashore through the surf, the lifeboat pulled away, and
the _Dora_ disappeared after a farewell toot of her whistle. Their last
glimpse of her showed the captain waving good-by and the purser flapping
a red tablecloth at them from the after-deck.

"Cheerful place, this," Grant remarked, as he noted the desolate
surroundings of dune and hillside.

The beach itself was black and raw where the surf washed it, but
elsewhere all was white, save for the thickets of alder and willow which
protruded nakedly. The bay was little more than a hollow scooped out of
the Alaskan range; along the foothills behind there was a belt of spruce
and cottonwood and birch. It was a lonely and apparently unpeopled
wilderness in which they had been set down.

"Seems good to be back in the North again, doesn't it?" said Cantwell,
cheerily. "I'm tired of the booze, and the street cars, and the dames,
and all that civilized stuff. I'd rather be broke in Alaska--with
you--than a banker's son, back home."

Soon a globular Russian half-breed, the Katmai trader, appeared among
the dunes, and with him were some native villagers. That night the
partners slept in a snug log cabin, the roof of which was chained down
with old ships' cables. Petellin, the fat little trader, explained that
roofs in Katmai had a way of sailing off to seaward when the wind blew.
He listened to their plan of crossing the divide and nodded.

It could be done, of course, he agreed, but they were foolish to try it,
when the Illiamna route was open. Still, now that they were here, he
would find dogs for them, and a guide. The village hunters were out
after meat, however, and until they returned the white men would need to
wait in patience.

There followed several days of idleness, during which Cantwell and Grant
amused themselves around the village, teasing the squaws, playing games
with the boys, and flirting harmlessly with the girls, one of whom, in
particular, was not unattractive. She was perhaps three-quarters Aleut,
the other quarter being plain coquette, and, having been educated at the
town of Kodiak, she knew the ways and the wiles of the white man.

Cantwell approached her, and she met his extravagant advances more than
halfway. They were getting along nicely together when Grant, in a spirit
of fun, entered the game and won her fickle smiles for himself. He joked
his partner unmercifully, and Johnny accepted defeat gracefully, never
giving the matter a second thought.

When the hunters returned, dogs were bought, a guide was hired, and, a
week after landing, the friends were camped at timber line awaiting a
favorable moment for their dash across the range. Above them, white
hillsides rose in irregular leaps to the gash in the saw-toothed barrier
which formed the pass; below them a short valley led down to Katmai and
the sea. The day was bright, the air clear, nevertheless after the guide
had stared up at the peaks for a time he shook his head, then reentered
the tent and lay down. The mountains were "smoking"; from their tops
streamed a gossamer veil which the travelers knew to be drifting snow
clouds carried by the wind. It meant delay, but they were patient.

They were up and going on the following morning, however, with the
Indian in the lead. There was no trail; the hills were steep; in places
they were forced to unload the sled and hoist their outfit by means of
ropes, and as they mounted higher the snow deepened. It lay like loose
sand, only lighter; it shoved ahead of the sled in a feathery mass; the
dogs wallowed in it and were unable to pull, hence the greater part of
the work devolved upon the men. Once above the foothills and into the
range proper, the going became more level, but the snow remained
knee-deep.

The Indian broke trail stolidly; the partners strained at the sled,
which hung back like a leaden thing. By afternoon the dogs had become
disheartened and refused to heed the whip. There was neither fuel nor
running water, and therefore the party did not pause for luncheon. The
men were sweating profusely from their exertions and had long since
become parched with thirst, but the dry snow was like chalk and scoured
their throats.

Cantwell was the first to show the effects of his unusual exertions, for
not only had he assumed a lion's share of the work, but the last few
months of easy living had softened his muscles, and in consequence his
vitality was quickly spent. His undergarments were drenched; he was
fearfully dry inside; a terrible thirst seemed to penetrate his whole
body; he was forced to rest frequently.

Grant eyed him with some concern, finally inquiring, "Feel bad,
Johnny?"

Cantwell nodded. Their fatigue made both men economical of language.

"What's the matter?"

"Thirsty!" The former could barely speak.

"There won't be any water till we get across. You'll have to stand it."

They resumed their duties; the Indian "swish-swished" ahead, as if
wading through a sea of swan's-down; the dogs followed listlessly; the
partners leaned against the stubborn load.

A faint breath finally came out of the north, causing Grant and the
guide to study the sky anxiously. Cantwell was too weary to heed the
increasing cold. The snow on the slopes above began to move; here and
there, on exposed ridges, it rose in clouds and puffs; the cleancut
outlines of the hills became obscured as by a fog; the languid wind bit
cruelly.

After a time Johnny fell back upon the sled and exclaimed: "I'm--all in,
Mort. Don't seem to have the--guts." He was pale, his eyes were
tortured. He scooped a mitten full of snow and raised it to his lips,
then spat it out, still dry.

"Here! Brace up!" In a panic of apprehension at this collapse Grant
shook him; he had never known Johnny to fail like this. "Take a drink;
it'll do you good." He drew a bottle from one of the dunnage bags and
Cantwell seized it avidly. It was wet; it would quench his thirst, he
thought. Before Mort could check him he had drunk a third of the
contents.

The effect was almost instantaneous, for Cantwell's stomach was empty
and his tissues seemed to absorb the liquor like a dry sponge; his
fatigue fell away, he became suddenly strong and vigorous again. But
before he had gone a hundred yards the reaction followed. First his mind
grew thick, then his limbs became unmanageable and his muscles flabby.
He was drunk. Yet it was a strange and dangerous intoxication, against
which he struggled desperately. He fought it for perhaps a quarter of a
mile before it mastered him; then he gave up.

Both men knew that stimulants are never taken on the trail, but they had
never stopped to reason why, and even now they did not attribute
Johnny's breakdown to the brandy. After a while he stumbled and fell,
then, the cool snow being grateful to his face, he sprawled there
motionless until Mort dragged him to the sled. He stared at his partner
in perplexity and laughed foolishly. The wind was increasing, darkness
was near, they had not yet reached the Bering slope.

Something in the drunken man's face frightened Grant and, extracting a
ship's biscuit from the grub box, he said, hurriedly: "Here, Johnny. Get
something under your belt, quick."

Cantwell obediently munched the hard cracker, but there was no moisture
on his tongue; his throat was paralyzed; the crumbs crowded themselves
from the corners of his lips. He tried with limber fingers to stuff
them down, or to assist the muscular action of swallowing, but finally
expelled them in a cloud. Mort drew the parka hood over his partner's
head, for the wind cut like a scythe and the dogs were turning tail to
it, digging holes in the snow for protection. The air about them was
like yeast; the light was fading.

The Indian snowshoed his way back, advising a quick camp until the storm
abated, but to this suggestion Grant refused to listen, knowing only too
well the peril of such a course. Nor did he dare take Johnny on the
sled, since the fellow was half asleep already, but instead whipped up
the dogs and urged his companion to follow as best he could.

When Cantwell fell, for a second time, he returned, dragged him forward,
and tied his wrists firmly, yet loosely, to the load.

The storm was pouring over them now, like water out of a spout; it
seared and blinded them; its touch was like that of a flame.
Nevertheless they struggled on into the smother, making what headway
they could. The Indian led, pulling at the end of a rope; Grant strained
at the sled and hoarsely encouraged the dogs; Cantwell stumbled and
lurched in the rear like an unwilling prisoner. When he fell his
companion lifted him, then beat him, cursed him, tried in every way to
rouse him from his lethargy.

After an interminable time they found they were descending and this gave
them heart to plunge ahead more rapidly. The dogs began to trot as the
sled overran them; they rushed blindly into gullies, fetching up at the
bottom in a tangle, and Johnny followed in a nerveless, stupefied
condition. He was dragged like a sack of flour for his legs were limp
and he lacked muscular control, but every dash, every fall, every quick
descent drove the sluggish blood through his veins and cleared his brain
momentarily. Such moments were fleeting, however; much of the time his
mind was a blank, and it was only by a mechanical effort that he fought
off unconsciousness.

He had vague memories of many beatings at Mort's hands, of the slippery
clean-swept ice of a stream over which he limply skidded, of being
carried into a tent where a candle flickered and a stove roared. Grant
was holding something hot to his lips, and then--

It was morning. He was weak and sick; he felt as if he had awakened from
a hideous dream. "I played out, didn't I?" he queried, wonderingly.

"You sure did," Grant laughed. "It was a tight squeak, old boy. I never
thought I'd get you through."

"Played out! I--can't understand it." Cantwell prided himself on his
strength and stamina, therefore the truth was unbelievable. He and Mort
had long been partners, they had given and taken much at each other's
hands, but this was something altogether different. Grant had saved his
life, at risk of his own; the older man's endurance had been the greater
and he had used it to good advantage. It embarrassed Johnny tremendously
to realize that he had proved unequal to his share of the work, for he
had never before experienced such an obligation. He apologized
repeatedly during the few days he lay sick, and meanwhile Mort waited
upon him like a mother.

Cantwell was relieved when at last they had abandoned camp, changed
guides at the next village, and were on their way along the coast, for
somehow he felt very sensitive about his collapse. He was, in fact,
extremely ashamed of himself.

Once he had fully recovered he had no further trouble, but soon rounded
into fit condition and showed no effects of his ordeal. Day after day he
and Mort traveled through the solitudes, their isolation broken only by
occasional glimpses of native villages, where they rested briefly and
renewed their supply of dog feed.

But although the younger man was now as well and strong as ever, he was
uncomfortably conscious that his trail mate regarded him as the weaker
of the two and shielded him in many ways. Grant performed most of the
unpleasant tasks, and occasionally cautioned Johnny about overdoing.
This protective attitude at first amused, then offended Cantwell, it
galled him until he was upon the point of voicing his resentment, but
reflected that he had no right to object, for, judging by past
performances, he had proved his inferiority. This uncomfortable
realization forever arose to prevent open rebellion, but he asserted
himself secretly by robbing Grant of his self-appointed tasks. He rose
first in the mornings, he did the cooking, he lengthened his turns
ahead of the dogs, he mended harness after the day's hike had ended. Of
course the older man objected, and for a time they had a good-natured
rivalry as to who should work and who should rest--only it was not quite
so good-natured on Cantwell's part as he made it appear.

Mort broke out in friendly irritation one day: "Don't try to do
everything, Johnny. Remember I'm no cripple."

"Humph! You proved that. I guess it's up to me to do your work."

"Oh, forget that day on the pass, can't you?"

Johnny grunted a second time, and from his tone it was evident that he
would never forget, unpleasant though the memory remained. Sensing his
sullen resentment, the other tried to rally him, but made a bad job of
it. The humor of men in the open is not delicate; their wit and their
words become coarsened in direct proportion as they revert to the
primitive; it is one effect of the solitudes.

Grant spoke extravagantly, mockingly, of his own superiority in a way
which ordinarily would have brought a smile to Cantwell's lips, but the
latter did not smile. He taunted Johnny humorously on his lack of
physical prowess, his lack of good looks and manly qualities--something
which had never failed to result in a friendly exchange of badinage; he
even teased him about his defeat with the Katmai girl.

Cantwell did respond finally, but afterward he found himself wondering
if Mort could have been in earnest. He dismissed the thought with some
impatience. But men on the trail have too much time for their thoughts;
there is nothing in the monotonous routine of the day's work to distract
them, so the partner who had played out dwelt more and more upon his
debt and upon his friend's easy assumption of preeminence. The weight of
obligation began to chafe him, lightly at first, but with
ever-increasing discomfort. He began to think that Grant honestly
considered himself the better man, merely because chance had played into
his hands.

It was silly, even childish, to dwell on the subject, he reflected, and
yet he could not banish it from his mind. It was always before him, in
one form or another. He felt the strength in his lean muscles, and
sneered at the thought that Mort should be deceived. If it came to a
physical test he felt sure he could break his slighter partner with his
bare hands, and as for endurance--well, he was hungry for a chance to
demonstrate it.

They talked little; men seldom converse in the wastes, for there is
something about the silence of the wilderness which discourages speech.
And no land is so grimly silent, so hushed and soundless, as the frozen
North. For days they marched through desolation, without glimpse of
human habitation, without sight of track or trail, without sound of a
human voice to break the monotony. There was no game in the country,
with the exception of an occasional bird or rabbit, nothing but the
white hills, the fringe of alder tops along the watercourses, and the
thickets of gnarled, unhealthy spruce in the smothered valleys.

Their destination was a mysterious stream at the headwaters of the
unmapped Kuskokwim, where rumor said there was gold, and whither they
feared other men were hastening from the mining country far to the
north.

Now it is a penalty of the White Country that men shall think of women;
Cantwell began to brood upon the Katmai girl, for she was the last; her
eyes were haunting and distance had worked its usual enchantment. He
reflected that Mort had shouldered him aside and won her favor, then
boasted of it. Johnny awoke one night with a dream of her, and lay
quivering.

"She was only a squaw," he said, half aloud. "If I'd really tried--"

Grant lay beside him, snoring, the heat of their bodies intermingled.
The waking man tried to compose himself, but his partner's stertorous
breathing irritated him beyond measure; for a long time he remained
motionless, staring into the gray blurr of the tent top. He had played
out. He owed his life to the man who had cheated him of the Katmai girl,
and that man knew it. He had become a weak, helpless thing, dependent
upon another's strength, and that other now accepted his superiority as
a matter of course. The obligation was insufferable, and--it was
unjust. The North had played him a devilish trick, it had betrayed him,
it had bound him to his benefactor with chains of gratitude which were
irksome. Had they been real chains they could have galled him no more
than at this moment.

As time passed the men spoke less frequently to each other. Grant joshed
his mate roughly, once or twice, masking beneath an assumption of
jocularity his own vague irritation at the change that had come over
them. It was as if he had probed at an open wound with clumsy fingers.

Cantwell had by this time assumed most of those petty camp tasks which
provoke tired trailers, those humdrum duties which are so trying to
exhausted nerves, and of course they wore upon him as they wear upon
every man. But, once he had taken them over, he began to resent Grant's
easy relinquishment; it rankled him to realize how willingly the other
allowed him to do the cooking, the dish-washing, the fire-building, the
bed-making. Little monotonies of this kind form the hardest part of
winter travel, they are the rocks upon which friendships founder and
partnerships are wrecked. Out on the trail, nature equalizes the work to
a great extent, and no man can shirk unduly, but in camp, inside the
cramped confines of a tent pitched on boughs laid over the snow, it is
very different. There one must busy himself while the other rests and
keeps his legs out of the way if possible. One man sits on the bedding
at the rear of the shelter, and shivers, while the other squats over a
tantalizing fire of green wood, blistering his face and parboiling his
limbs inside his sweaty clothing. Dishes must be passed, food divided,
and it is poor food, poorly prepared at best. Sometimes men criticize
and voice longings for better grub and better cooking. Remarks of this
kind have been known to result in tragedies, bitter words and flaming
curses--then, perhaps, wild actions, memories of which the later years
can never erase.

It is but one prank of the wilderness, one grim manifestation of its
silent forces.

Had Grant been unable to do his part Cantwell would have willingly
accepted the added burden, but Mort was able, he was nimble and "handy,"
he was the better cook of the two; in fact, he was the better man in
every way--or so he believed. Cantwell sneered at the last thought, and
the memory of his debt was like bitter medicine.

His resentment--in reality nothing more than a phase of insanity begot
of isolation and silence--could not help but communicate itself to his
companion, and there resulted a mutual antagonism, which grew into a
dislike, then festered into something more, something strange,
reasonless, yet terribly vivid and amazingly potent for evil. Neither
man ever mentioned it--their tongues were clenched between their teeth
and they held themselves in check with harsh hands--but it was
constantly in their minds, nevertheless. No man who has not suffered the
manifold irritations of such an intimate association can appreciate the
gnawing canker of animosity like this. It was dangerous because there
was no relief from it: the two were bound together as by gyves; they
shared each other's every action and every plan; they trod in each
other's tracks, slept in the same bed, ate from the same plate. They
were like prisoners ironed to the same staple.

Each fought the obsession in his own way, but it is hard to fight the
impalpable, hence their sick fancies grew in spite of themselves. Their
minds needed food to prey upon, but found none. Each began to criticize
the other silently, to sneer at his weaknesses, to meditate derisively
upon his peculiarities. After a time they no longer resisted the advance
of these poisonous thoughts, but welcomed it.

On more than one occasion the embers of their wrath were upon the point
of bursting into flame, but each realized that the first ill-considered
word would serve to slip the leash from those demons that were straining
to go free, and so managed to restrain himself.

The crisis came one crisp morning when a dog team whirled around a bend
in the river and a white man hailed them. He was the mail carrier, on
his way out from Nome, and he brought news of the "inside."

"Where are you boys bound for?" he inquired when greetings were over
and gossip of the trail had passed.

"We're going to the Stony River strike," Grant told him.

"Stony River? Up the Kuskokwim?"

"Yes!"

The mail man laughed. "Can you beat that? Ain't you heard about Stony
River?"

"No!"

"Why, it's a fake--no such place."

There was a silence; the partners avoided each other's eyes.

"MacDonald, the fellow that started it, is on his way to Dawson. There's
a gang after him, too, and if he's caught it'll go hard with him. He
wrote the letters--to himself--and spread the news just to raise a
grubstake. He cleaned up big before they got onto him. He peddled his
tips for real money."

"Yes!" Grant spoke quietly. "Johnny bought one. That's what brought us
from Seattle. We went out on the last boat and figured we'd come in from
this side before the break-up. So--fake!"

"Gee! You fellers bit good." The mail carrier shook his head. "Well!
You'd better keep going now; you'll get to Nome before the season opens.
Better take dogfish from Bethel--it's four bits a pound on the Yukon.
Sorry I didn't hit your camp last night; we'd 'a' had a visit. Tell the
gang that you saw me." He shook hands ceremoniously, yelled at his
panting dogs, and went swiftly on his way, waving a mitten on high as he
vanished around the next bend.

The partners watched him go, then Grant turned to Johnny, and repeated:
"Fake! MacDonald stung you."

Cantwell's face went as white as the snow behind him, his eyes blazed.
"Why did you tell him I bit?" he demanded harshly.

"Hunh! _Didn't_ you bite? Two thousand miles afoot; three months of
Hades; for nothing. That's biting some."

"_Well!_" The speaker's face was convulsed, and Grant's flamed with an
answering anger. They glared at each other for a moment. "Don't blame
me. You fell for it, too."

"I----" Mort checked his rushing words.

"Yes, _you_! Now, what are you going to do about it? Welsh?"

"I'm going through to Nome." The sight of his partner's rage had set
Mort to shaking with a furious desire to fly at his throat, but
fortunately, he retained a spark of sanity.

"Then shut up, and quit chewing the rag. You--talk too much."

Mort's eyes were bloodshot; they fell upon the carbine under the sled
lashings, and lingered there, then wavered. He opened his lips,
reconsidered, spoke softly to the team, then lifted the heavy dog whip
and smote the Malemutes with all his strength.

The men resumed their journey without further words, but each was
cursing inwardly.

"So! I talk too much," Grant thought. The accusation struck in his mind
and he determined to speak no more.

"He blames me," Cantwell reflected, bitterly. "I'm in wrong again and he
couldn't keep his mouth shut. A fine partner, he is!"

All day they plodded on, neither trusting himself to speak. They ate
their evening meal like mutes; they avoided each other's eyes. Even the
guide noticed the change and looked on curiously.

There were two robes and these the partners shared nightly, but their
hatred had grown so during the past few hours that the thought of lying
side by side, limb to limb, was distasteful.

Yet neither dared suggest a division of the bedding, for that would have
brought further words and resulted in the crash which they longed for,
but feared. They stripped off their furs, and lay down beside each other
with the same repugnance they would have felt had there been a serpent
in the couch.

This unending malevolent silence became terrible. The strain of it
increased, for each man now had something definite to cherish in the
words and the looks that had passed. They divided the camp work with
scrupulous nicety, each man waited upon himself and asked no favors. The
knowledge of his debt forever chafed Cantwell; Grant resented his
companion's lack of gratitude.

Of course they spoke occasionally--it was beyond human endurance to
remain entirely dumb--but they conversed in monosyllables, about trivial
things, and their voices were throaty, as if the effort choked them.
Meanwhile they continued to glow inwardly at a white heat.

Cantwell no longer felt the desire merely to match his strength against
Grant's; the estrangement had become too wide for that; a physical
victory would have been flat and tasteless; he craved some deeper
satisfaction. He began to think of the ax--just how or when or why he
never knew. It was a thin-bladed, polished thing of frosty steel, and
the more he thought of it the stronger grew his impulse to rid himself
once for all of that presence which exasperated him. It would be very
easy, he reasoned; a sudden blow, with the weight of his shoulders
behind it--he fancied he could feel the bit sink into Grant's flesh,
cleaving bone and cartilages in its course--a slanting downward stroke,
aimed at the neck where it joined the body, and he would be forever
satisfied. It would be ridiculously simple. He practiced in the gloom of
evening as he felled spruce trees for firewood; he guarded the ax
religiously; it became a living thing which urged him on to violence. He
saw it standing by the tent fly when he closed his eyes to sleep; he
dreamed of it; he sought it out with his eyes when he first awoke. He
slid it loosely under the sled lashings every morning, thinking that its
use could not long be delayed.

As for Grant, the carbine dwelt forever in his mind, and his fingers
itched for it. He secretly slipped a cartridge into the chamber, and
when an occasional ptarmigan offered itself for a target he saw the
white spot on the breast of Johnny's reindeer parka, dancing ahead of
the Lyman bead.

The solitude had done its work; the North had played its grim comedy to
the final curtain, making sport of men's affections and turning love to
rankling hate. But into the mind of each man crept a certain craftiness.
Each longed to strike, but feared to face the consequences. It was
lonesome, here among the white hills and the deathly silences, yet they
reflected that it would be still more lonesome if they were left to keep
step with nothing more substantial than a memory. They determined,
therefore, to wait until civilization was nearer, meanwhile rehearsing
the moment they knew was inevitable. Over and over in their thoughts
each of them enacted the scene, ending it always with the picture of a
prostrate man in a patch of trampled snow which grew crimson as the
other gloated.

They paused at Bethel Mission long enough to load with dried salmon,
then made the ninety-mile portage over lake and tundra to the Yukon.
There they got their first touch of the "inside" world. They camped in a
barabora where white men had slept a few nights before, and heard their
own language spoken by native tongues. The time was growing short now,
and they purposely dismissed their guide, knowing that the trail was
plain from there on. When they hitched up, on the next morning, Cantwell
placed the ax, bit down, between the tarpaulin and the sled rail,
leaving the helve projecting where his hand could reach it. Grant thrust
the barrel of the rifle beneath a lashing, with the butt close by the
handle-bars, and it was loaded.

A mile from the village they were overtaken by an Indian and his squaw,
traveling light behind hungry dogs. The natives attached themselves to
the white men and hung stubbornly to their heels, taking advantage of
their tracks. When night came they camped alongside, in the hope of
food. They announced that they were bound for St. Michaels, and in spite
of every effort to shake them off they remained close behind the
partners until that point was reached.

At St. Michaels there were white men, practically the first Johnny and
Mort had encountered since landing at Katmai, and for a day at least
they were sane. But there were still three hundred miles to be traveled,
three hundred miles of solitude and haunting thoughts. Just as they were
about to start, Cantwell came upon Grant and the A. C. agent, and heard
his name pronounced, also the word "Katmai." He noted that Mort fell
silent at his approach, and instantly his anger blazed afresh. He
decided that the latter had been telling the story of their experience
on the pass and boasting of his service. So much the better, he
thought, in a blind rage; that which he planned doing would appear all
the more like an accident, for who would dream that a man could kill the
person to whom he owed his life?

That night he waited for a chance.

They were camped in a dismal hut on a wind-swept shore; they were alone.
But Grant was waiting also, it seemed. They lay down beside each other,
ostensibly to sleep; their limbs touched; the warmth from their bodies
intermingled, but they did not close their eyes.

They were up and away early, with Nome drawing rapidly nearer. They had
skirted an ocean, foot by foot; Bering Sea lay behind them, now, and its
northern shore swung westward to their goal. For two months they had
lived in silent animosity, feeding on bitter food while their elbows
rubbed.

Noon found them floundering through one of those unheralded storms which
make coast travel so hazardous. The morning had turned off gray, the sky
was of a leaden hue which blended perfectly with the snow underfoot,
there was no horizon, it was impossible to see more than a few yards in
any direction. The trail soon became obliterated and their eyes began to
play tricks. For all they could distinguish, they might have been
suspended in space; they seemed to be treading the measures of an
endless dance in the center of a whirling cloud. Of course it was cold,
for the wind off the open sea was damp, but they were not men to turn
back.

They soon discovered that their difficulty lay not in facing the storm,
but in holding to the trail. That narrow, two-foot causeway, packed by a
winter's travel and frozen into a ribbon of ice by a winter's frosts,
afforded their only avenue of progress, for the moment they left it the
sled plowed into the loose snow, well-nigh disappearing and bringing the
dogs to a standstill. It was the duty of the driver, in such case, to
wallow forward, right the load if necessary, and lift it back into
place. These mishaps were forever occurring, for it was impossible to
distinguish the trail beneath its soft covering. However, if the
driver's task was hard it was no more trying than that of the man ahead,
who was compelled to feel out and explore the ridge of hardened snow and
ice with his feet, after the fashion of a man walking a plank in the
dark. Frequently he lunged into the drifts with one foot, or both; his
glazed mukluk soles slid about, causing him to bestride the invisible
hogback, or again his legs crossed awkwardly, throwing him off his
balance. At times he wandered away from the path entirely and had to
search it out again. These exertions were very wearing and they were
dangerous, also, for joints are easily dislocated, muscles twisted, and
tendons strained.

Hour after hour the march continued, unrelieved by any change, unbroken
by any speck or spot of color. The nerves of their eyes, wearied by
constant nearsighted peering at the snow, began to jump so that vision
became untrustworthy. Both travelers appreciated the necessity of
clinging to the trail, for, once they lost it, they knew they might
wander about indefinitely until they chanced to regain it or found their
way to the shore, while always to seaward was the menace of open water,
of air holes, or cracks which might gape beneath their feet like jaws.
Immersion in this temperature, no matter how brief, meant death.

The monotony of progress through this unreal, leaden world became almost
unbearable. The repeated strainings and twistings they suffered in
walking the slippery ridge reduced the men to weariness; their legs grew
clumsy and their feet uncertain. Had they found a camping place they
would have stopped, but they dared not forsake the thin thread that
linked them with safety to go and look for one, not knowing where the
shore lay. In storms of this kind men have lain in their sleeping bags
for days within a stone's throw of a road-house or village. Bodies have
been found within a hundred yards of shelter after blizzards have
abated.

Cantwell and Grant had no choice, therefore, except to bore into the
welter of drifting flakes.

It was late in the afternoon when the latter met with an accident.
Johnny, who had taken a spell at the rear, heard him cry out, saw him
stagger, struggle to hold his footing, then sink into the snow. The
dogs paused instantly, lay down, and began to strip the ice pellets
from between their toes.

Cantwell spoke harshly, leaning upon the handle-bars: "Well! What's the
idea?"

It was the longest sentence of the day.

"I've--hurt myself." Mort's voice was thin and strange; he raised
himself to a sitting posture, and reached beneath his parka, then lay
back weakly. He writhed, his face was twisted with pain. He continued to
lie there, doubled into a knot of suffering. A groan was wrenched from
between his teeth.

"Hurt? How?" Johnny inquired, dully.

It seemed very ridiculous to see that strong man kicking around in the
snow.

"I've ripped something loose--here." Mort's palms were pressed in upon
his groin, his fingers were clutching something. "Ruptured--I guess." He
tried again to rise, but sank back. His cap had fallen off and his
forehead glistened with sweat.

Cantwell went forward and lifted him. It was the first time in many days
that their hands had touched, and the sensation affected him strangely.
He struggled to repress a devilish mirth at the thought that Grant had
played out--it amounted to that and nothing less; the trail had
delivered him into his enemy's hands, his hour had struck. Johnny
determined to square the debt now, once for all, and wipe his own mind
clean of that poison which corroded it. His muscles were strong, his
brain clear, he had never felt his strength so irresistible as at this
moment, while Mort, for all his boasted superiority, was nothing but a
nerveless thing hanging limp against his breast. Providence had arranged
it all. The younger man was impelled to give raucous voice to his glee,
and yet--his helpless burden exerted an odd effect upon him.

He deposited his foe upon the sled and stared at the face he had not met
for many days. He saw how white it was, how wet and cold, how weak and
dazed, then as he looked he cursed inwardly, for the triumph of his
moment was spoiled.

The ax was there, its polished bit showed like a piece of ice, its helve
protruded handily, but there was no need of it now; his fingers were all
the weapons Johnny needed; they were more than sufficient, in fact, for
Mort was like a child.

Cantwell was a strong man, and, although the North had coarsened him,
yet underneath the surface was a chivalrous regard for all things weak,
and this the trail madness had not affected. He had longed for this
instant, but now that it had come he felt no enjoyment, since he could
not harm a sick man and waged no war on cripples. Perhaps, when Mort had
rested, they could settle their quarrel; this was as good a place as
any. The storm hid them, they would leave no traces, there could be no
interruption.

But Mort did not rest. He could not walk; movement brought excruciating
pain.

Finally Cantwell heard himself saying: "Better wrap up and lie still
for a while. I'll get the dogs underway." His words amazed him dully.
They were not at all what he had intended to say.

The injured man demurred, but the other insisted gruffly, then brought
him his mittens and cap, slapping the snow out of them before rousing
the team to motion. The load was very heavy now, the dogs had no
footprints to guide them, and it required all of Cantwell's efforts to
prevent capsizing. Night approached swiftly, the whirling snow particles
continued to flow past upon the wind, shrouding the earth in an
impenetrable pall.

The journey soon became a terrible ordeal, a slow, halting progress that
led nowhere and was accomplished at the cost of tremendous exertion.
Time after time Johnny broke trail, then returned and urged the huskies
forward to the end of his tracks. When he lost the path he sought it
out, laboriously hoisted the sledge back into place, and coaxed his
four-footed helpers to renewed effort. He was drenched with
perspiration, his inner garments were steaming, his outer ones were
frozen into a coat of armor; when he paused he chilled rapidly. His
vision was untrustworthy, also, and he felt snow blindness coming on.
Grant begged him more than once to unroll the bedding and prepare to
sleep out the storm; he even urged Johnny to leave him and make a dash
for his own safety, but at this the younger man cursed and told him to
hold his tongue.

Night found the lone driver slipping, plunging, lurching ahead of the
dogs, or shoving at the handle-bars and shouting at the dogs. Finally,
during a pause for rest he heard a sound which roused him. Out of the
gloom to the right came the faint complaining howl of a malemute; it was
answered by his own dogs, and the next moment they had caught a scent
which swerved them shoreward and led them scrambling through the drifts.
Two hundred yards, and a steep bank loomed above, up and over which they
rushed, with Cantwell yelling encouragement; then a light showed, and
they were in the lee of a low-roofed hut.

A sick native, huddled over a Yukon stove, made them welcome to his mean
abode, explaining that his wife and son had gone to Unalaklik for
supplies.

Johnny carried his partner to the one unoccupied bunk and stripped his
clothes from him. With his own hands he rubbed the warmth back into
Mortimer's limbs, then swiftly prepared hot food, and, holding him in
the hollow of his aching arm, fed him, a little at a time. He was like
to drop from exhaustion, but he made no complaint. With one folded robe
he made the hard boards comfortable, then spread the other as a
covering. For himself he sat beside the fire and fought his weariness.
When he dozed off and the cold awakened him, he renewed the fire; he
heated beef tea, and, rousing Mort, fed it to him with a teaspoon. All
night long, at intervals, he tended the sick man, and Grant's eyes
followed him with an expression that brought a fierce pain to Cantwell's
throat.

"You're mighty good--after the rotten way I acted," the former whispered
once.

And Johnny's big hand trembled so that he spilled the broth.

His voice was low and tender as he inquired, "Are you resting easier
now?"

The other nodded.

"Maybe you're not hurt badly, after--all. God! That would be awful----"
Cantwell choked, turned away, and, raising his arms against the log
wall, buried his face in them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The morning broke clear; Grant was sleeping. As Johnny stiffly mounted
the creek bank with a bucket of water he heard a jingle of sleighbells
and saw a sled with two white men swing in toward the cabin.

"Hello!" he called, then heard his own name pronounced.

"Johnny Cantwell, by all that's holy!"

The next moment he was shaking hands vigorously with two old friends
from Nome.

"Martin and me are bound for Saint Mikes," one of them explained. "Where
the deuce did you come from, Johnny?"

"The 'outside.' Started for Stony River, but--"

"Stony River!" The newcomers began to laugh loudly and Cantwell joined
them. It was the first time he had laughed for weeks. He realized the
fact with a start, then recollected also his sleeping partner, and said:

"Sh-h! Mort's inside, asleep!"

During the night everything had changed for Johnny Cantwell; his mental
attitude, his hatred, his whole reasonless insanity. Everything was
different now, even his debt was canceled, the weight of obligation was
removed, and his diseased fancies were completely cured.

"Yes! Stony River," he repeated, grinning broadly. "I bit!"

Martin burst forth, gleefully: "They caught MacDonald at Holy Cross and
ran him out on a limb. He'll never start another stampede. Old man Baker
gun-branded him."

"What's the matter with Mort?" inquired the second traveler.

"He's resting up. Yesterday, during the storm he--" Johnny was upon the
point of saying "played out," but changed it to "had an accident. We
thought it was serious, but a few days' rest'll bring him around all
right. He saved me at Katmai, coming in. I petered out and threw up my
tail, but he got me through. Come inside and tell him the news."

"Sure thing."

"Well, well!" Martin said. "So you and Mort are still partners, eh?"

"_Still_ partners?" Johnny took up the pail of water. "Well, rather!
We'll always be partners." His voice was young and full and hearty as he
continued: "Why, Mort's the best fellow in the world. I'd lay down my
life for him."

FOOTNOTE:

[5] From _The Crimson Garden_. Copyright, 1911, 1912, 1913, 1916, by
Harper and Brothers. Reprinted by special permission of publisher and
author.




[Illustration]




VI.--That Spot[6]

_By Jack London_


I DON'T think much of Stephen Mackaye any more, though I used to swear
by him. I know that in those days I loved him more than my brother. If
ever I meet Stephen Mackaye again, I shall not be responsible for my
actions. It passes beyond me that a man with whom I shared food and
blanket, and with whom I mushed over the Chilcoot Trail, should turn out
the way he did. I always sized Steve up as a square man, a kindly
comrade, without an iota of anything vindictive or malicious in his
nature. I shall never trust my judgment in men again. Why, I nursed that
man through typhoid fever; we starved together on the headwaters of the
Stewart; and he saved my life on the Little Salmon. And now, after the
years we were together, all I can say of Stephen Mackaye is that he is
the meanest man I ever knew.

We started for the Klondike in the fall rush of 1897, and we started
too late to get over Chilcoot Pass before the freeze-up. We packed our
outfit on our backs part way over, when the snow began to fly, and then
we had to buy dogs in order to sled it the rest of the way. That was how
we came to get that Spot. Dogs were high, and we paid one hundred and
ten dollars for him. He looked worth it. I say _looked_, because he was
one of the finest-appearing dogs I ever saw. He weighed sixty pounds,
and he had all the lines of a good sled animal. We never could make out
his breed. He wasn't husky, nor Malemute, nor Hudson Bay; he looked like
all of them and he didn't look like any of them; and on top of it all he
had some of the white man's dog in him, for on one side, in the thick of
the mixed yellow-brown-red-and-dirty-white that was his prevailing
color, there was a spot of coal-black as big as a water bucket. That was
why we called him Spot.

He was a good looker all right. When he was in condition his muscles
stood out in bunches all over him. And he was the strongest-looking
brute I ever saw in Alaska, also the most intelligent-looking. To run
your eyes over him, you'd think he could outpull three dogs of his own
weight. Maybe he could, but I never saw it. His intelligence didn't run
that way. He could steal and forage to perfection; he had an instinct
that was positively gruesome for divining when work was to be done and
for making a sneak accordingly; and for getting lost and not staying
lost he was nothing short of inspired. But when it came to work, the
way that intelligence dribbled out of him and left him a mere clot of
wobbling, stupid jelly would make your heart bleed.

There are times when I think it wasn't stupidity. Maybe, like some men I
know, he was too wise to work. I shouldn't wonder if he put it all over
us with that intelligence of his. Maybe he figured it all out and
decided that a licking now and again and no work was a whole lot better
than work all the time and no licking. He was intelligent enough for
such a computation. I tell you, I've sat and looked into that dog's eyes
till the shivers ran up and down my spine and the marrow crawled like
yeast, what of the intelligence I saw shining out. I can't express
myself about that intelligence. It is beyond mere words. I saw it,
that's all. At times it was like gazing into a human soul, to look into
his eyes; and what I saw there frightened me and started all sorts of
ideas in my own mind of reincarnation and all the rest. I tell you I
sensed something big in that brute's eyes; there was a message there,
but I wasn't big enough myself to catch it. Whatever it was (I know I'm
making a fool of myself)--whatever it was, it baffled me. I can't give
an inkling of what I saw in that brute's eyes; it wasn't light, it
wasn't color; it was something that moved, away back, when the eyes
themselves weren't moving. And I guess I didn't see it move, either; I
only sensed that it moved. It was an expression,--that's what it
was,--and I got an impression of it. No; it was different from a mere
expression; it was more than that. I don't know what it was, but it gave
me a feeling of kinship just the same. Oh, no, not sentimental kinship.
It was, rather, a kinship of equality. Those eyes never pleaded like a
deer's eyes. They challenged. No, it wasn't defiance. It was just a calm
assumption of equality. And I don't think it was deliberate. My belief
is that it was unconscious on his part. It was there because it was
there, and it couldn't help shining out. No, I don't mean shine. It
didn't shine; it _moved_. I know I'm talking rot, but if you'd looked
into that animal's eyes the way I have, you'd understand. Steve was
affected the same way I was. Why, I tried to kill that Spot once--he was
no good for anything; and I fell down on it. I led him out into the
brush, and he came along slow and unwilling. He knew what was going on.
I stopped in a likely place, put my foot on the rope, and pulled my big
Colt's. And that dog sat down and looked at me. I tell you he didn't
plead. He just looked. And I saw all kinds of incomprehensible things
moving, yes, _moving_, in those eyes of his. I didn't really see them
move; I thought I saw them, for, as I said before, I guess I only sensed
them. And I want to tell you right now that it got beyond me. It was
like killing a man, a conscious, brave man who looked calmly into your
gun as much as to say, "Who's afraid?" Then, too, the message seemed so
near that, instead of pulling the trigger quick, I stopped to see if I
could catch the message. There it was, right before me, glimmering all
around in those eyes of his. And then it was too late. I got scared. I
was trembly all over, and my stomach generated a nervous palpitation
that made me seasick. I just sat down and looked at that dog, and he
looked at me, till I thought I was going crazy. Do you want to know what
I did? I threw down the gun and ran back to camp with the fear of God in
my heart. Steve laughed at me. But I notice that Steve led Spot into the
woods, a week later, for the same purpose, and that Steve came back
alone, and a little later Spot drifted back, too.

At any rate, Spot wouldn't work. We paid a hundred and ten dollars for
him from the bottom of our sack, and he wouldn't work. He wouldn't even
tighten the traces. Steve spoke to him the first time we put him in
harness, and he sort of shivered, that was all. Not an ounce on the
traces. He just stood still and wobbled, like so much jelly. Steve
touched him with the whip. He yelped, but not an ounce. Steve touched
him again, a bit harder, and he howled--the regular long wolf howl. Then
Steve got mad and gave him half a dozen, and I came on the run from the
tent.

I told Steve he was brutal with the animal, and we had some words--the
first we'd ever had. He threw the whip down in the snow and walked away
mad. I picked it up and went to it. That Spot trembled and wobbled and
cowered before ever I swung the lash, and with the first bite of it he
howled like a lost soul. Next he lay down in the snow. I started the
rest of the dogs, and they dragged him along, while I threw the whip
into him. He rolled over on his back and bumped along, his four legs
waving in the air, himself howling as though he was going through a
sausage machine. Steve came back and laughed at me, and I apologized for
what I'd said.

There was no getting any work out of that Spot; and to make up for it,
he was the biggest pig-glutton of a dog I ever saw. On top of that, he
was the cleverest thief. These was no circumventing him. Many a
breakfast we went without our bacon because Spot had been there first.
And it was because of him that we nearly starved to death up the
Stewart. He figured out the way to break into our meat cache, and what
he didn't eat, the rest of the team did. But he was impartial. He stole
from everybody. He was a restless dog, always very busy snooping around
or going somewhere. And there was never a camp within five miles that he
didn't raid. The worst of it was that they always came back on us to pay
his board bill, which was just, being the law of the land; but it was
mighty hard on us, especially that first winter on the Chilcoot, when we
were busted, paying for whole hams and sides of bacon that we never ate.
He could fight, too, that Spot. He could do everything but work. He
never pulled a pound, but he was the boss of the whole team. The way he
made those dogs stand around was an education. He bullied them, and
there was always one or more of them fresh-marked with his fangs. But he
was more than a bully. He wasn't afraid of anything that walked on four
legs; and I've seen him march, single-handed, into a strange team,
without any provocation whatever, and put the _kibosh_ on the whole
outfit. Did I say he could eat? I caught him eating the whip once.
That's straight. He started in at the lash, and when I caught him he was
down to the handle, and still going.

But he was a good looker. At the end of the first week we sold him for
seventy-five dollars to the Mounted Police. They had experienced dog
drivers, and we knew that by the time he'd covered the six hundred miles
to Dawson he'd be a good sled dog. I say we _knew_, for we were just
getting acquainted with that Spot. A little later we were not brash
enough to know anything where he was concerned. A week later we woke up
in the morning to the dangedest dog fight we'd ever heard. It was that
Spot come back and knocking the team into shape. We ate a pretty
depressing breakfast, I can tell you; but cheered up two hours afterward
when we sold him to an official courier, bound in to Dawson with
government dispatches. That Spot was only three days in coming back,
and, as usual, celebrated his arrival with a rough-house.

We spent the winter and spring, after our own outfit was across the
pass, freighting other people's outfits; and we made a fat stake. Also,
we made money out of Spot. If we sold him once, we sold him twenty
times. He always came back, and no one asked for their money. We didn't
want the money. We'd have paid handsomely for any one to take him off
our hands for keeps. We had to get rid of him, and we couldn't give him
away, for that would have been suspicious. But he was such a fine looker
that we never had any difficulty in selling him. "Unbroke," we'd say,
and they'd pay any old price for him. We sold him as low as twenty-five
dollars, and once we got a hundred and fifty for him. That particular
party returned him in person, refused to take his money back, and the
way he abused us was something awful. He said it was cheap at the price
to tell us what he thought of us; and we felt he was so justified that
we never talked back. But to this day I've never quite regained all the
old self-respect that was mine before that man talked to me.

When the ice cleared out of the lakes and river, we put our outfit in a
Lake Bennet boat and started for Dawson. We had a good team of dogs, and
of course we piled them on top the outfit. That Spot was along--there
was no losing him; and a dozen times, the first day, he knocked one or
another of the dogs overboard in the course of fighting with them. It
was close quarters, and he didn't like being crowded.

"What that dog needs is space," Steve said the second day. "Let's maroon
him."

We did, running the boat in at Caribou Crossing for him to jump ashore.
Two of the other dogs, good dogs, followed him; and we lost two whole
days trying to find them. We never saw those two dogs again; but the
quietness and relief we enjoyed made us decide, like the man who refused
his hundred and fifty, that it was cheap at the price. For the first
time in months Steve and I laughed and whistled and sang. We were as
happy as clams. The dark days were over. The nightmare had been lifted.
That Spot was gone.

Three weeks later, one morning, Steve and I were standing on the river
bank at Dawson. A small boat was just arriving from Lake Bennett. I saw
Steve give a start, and heard him say something that was not nice and
that was not under his breath. Then I looked; and there, in the bow of
the boat, with ears pricked up, sat Spot. Steve and I sneaked
immediately, like beaten curs, like cowards, like absconders from
justice. It was this last that the lieutenant of police thought when he
saw us sneaking. He surmised that there were law officers in the boat
who were after us. He didn't wait to find out, but kept us in sight, and
in the M.&.M. saloon got us in a corner. We had a merry time explaining,
for we refused to go back to the boat and meet Spot; and finally he held
us under guard of another policeman while he went to the boat. After we
got clear of him, we started for the cabin, and when we arrived, there
was that Spot sitting on the stoop waiting for us. Now how did he know
we lived there? There were forty thousand people in Dawson that summer,
and how did he _savvy_ our cabin out of all the cabins? How did he know
we were in Dawson, anyway? I leave it to you. But don't forget what I
have said about his intelligence and that immortal something I have seen
glimmering in his eyes.

There was no getting rid of him any more. There were too many people in
Dawson who had bought him up on Chilcoot, and the story got around. Half
a dozen times we put him on board steamboats going down the Yukon; but
he merely went ashore at the first landing and trotted back up the bank.
We couldn't sell him, we couldn't kill him (both Steve and I had tried),
and nobody else was able to kill him. He bore a charmed life. I've seen
him go down in a dog fight on the main street with fifty dogs on top of
him, and when they were separated, he'd appear on all his four legs,
unharmed, while two of the dogs that had been on top of him would be
lying dead.

I saw him steal a chunk of moose meat from Major Dinwiddie's cache so
heavy that he could just keep one jump ahead of Mrs. Dinwiddie's squaw
cook, who was after him with an ax. As he went up the hill, after the
squaw gave out, Major Dinwiddie himself came out and pumped his
Winchester into the landscape. He emptied his magazine twice, and never
touched that Spot. Then a policeman came along and arrested him for
discharging firearms inside the city limits. Major Dinwiddie paid his
fine, and Steve and I paid him for the moose meat at the rate of a
dollar a pound, bones and all. That was what he paid for it. Meat was
high that year.

I am only telling what I saw with my own eyes. And now I'll tell you
something, also. I saw that Spot fall through a water hole. The ice was
three and a half feet thick, and the current sucked him under like a
straw. Three hundred yards below was the big water hole used by the
hospital. Spot crawled out of the hospital water hole, licked off the
water, bit out the ice that had formed between his toes, trotted up the
bank, and whipped a big Newfoundland belonging to the Gold Commissioner.

In the fall of 1898, Steve and I poled up the Yukon on the last water,
bound for Stewart River. We took the dogs along, all except Spot. We
figured we'd been feeding him long enough. He'd cost us more time and
trouble and money and grub than we'd got by selling him on the
Chilcoot--especially grub. So Steve and I tied him down in the cabin and
pulled our freight. We camped that night at the mouth of Indian River,
and Steve and I were pretty facetious over having shaken him. Steve was
a funny cuss, and I was just sitting up in the blankets and laughing
when a tornado hit camp. The way that Spot walked into those dogs and
gave them what-for was hair-raising. Now how did he get loose? It's up
to you. I haven't any theory. And how did he get across the Klondike
River? That's another facer. And anyway, how did he know we had gone up
the Yukon? You see, we went by water, and he couldn't smell our tracks.
Steve and I began to get superstitious about that dog. He got on our
nerves, too; and, between you and me, we were just a mite afraid of him.

The freeze-up came on when we were at the mouth of Henderson Creek, and
we traded him off for two sacks of flour to an outfit that was bound up
White River after copper. Now that whole outfit was lost. Never trace
nor hide nor hair of men, dogs, sleds, or anything was ever found. They
dropped clean out of sight. It became one of the mysteries of the
country. Steve and I plugged away up the Stewart, and six weeks
afterward that Spot crawled into camp. He was a perambulating skeleton,
and could just drag along; but he got there. And what I want to know is
who told him we were up the Stewart? We could have gone a thousand other
places. How did he know? You tell me, and I'll tell you.

No losing him. At the Mayo he started a row with an Indian dog. The buck
who owned the dog took a swing at Spot with an ax, missed him, and
killed his own dog. Talk about magic and turning bullets aside--I, for
one, consider it a blamed sight harder to turn an ax aside with a big
buck at the other end of it. And I saw him do it with my own eyes. That
buck didn't want to kill his own dog. You've got to show me.

I told you about Spot breaking into our meat cache. It was nearly the
death of us. There wasn't any more meat to be killed, and meat was all
we had to live on. The moose had gone back several hundred miles and the
Indians with them. There we were. Spring was on, and we had to wait for
the river to break. We got pretty thin before we decided to eat the
dogs, and we decided to eat Spot first. Do you know what that dog did?
He sneaked. Now how did he know our minds were made up to eat him? We
sat up nights laying for him, but he never came back, and we ate the
other dogs. We ate the whole team.

And now for the sequel. You know what it is when a big river breaks up
and a few billion tons of ice go out, jamming and milling and grinding.
Just in the thick of it, when the Stewart went out, rumbling and
roaring, we sighted Spot out in the middle. He'd got caught as he was
trying to cross up above somewhere. Steve and I yelled and shouted and
ran up and down the bank, tossing our hats in the air. Sometimes we'd
stop and hug each other, we were that boisterous, for we saw Spot's
finish. He didn't have a chance in a million. He didn't have any chance
at all. After the ice-run, we got into a canoe and paddled down to the
Yukon, and down the Yukon to Dawson, stopping to feed up for a week at
the cabins at the mouth of Henderson Creek. And as we came in to the
bank at Dawson, there sat that Spot, waiting for us, his ears pricked
up, his tail wagging, his mouth smiling, extending a hearty welcome to
us. Now how did he get out of that ice? How did he know we were coming
to Dawson, to the very hour and minute, to be out there on the bank
waiting for us?

The more I think of that Spot, the more I am convinced that there are
things in this world that go beyond science. On no scientific grounds
can that Spot be explained. It's psychic phenomena, or mysticism, or
something of that sort, I guess, with a lot of theosophy thrown in. The
Klondike is a good country. I might have been there yet, and become a
millionaire, if it hadn't been for Spot. He got on my nerves. I stood
him for two years altogether, and then I guess my stamina broke. It was
the summer of 1899 when I pulled out. I didn't say anything to Steve. I
just sneaked. But I fixed it up all right. I wrote Steve a note, and
enclosed a package of "rough-on-rats," telling him what to do with it. I
was worn down to skin and bone by that Spot, and I was that nervous that
I'd jump and look around when there wasn't anybody within hailing
distance. But it was astonishing the way I recuperated when I got quit
of him. I got back twenty pounds before I arrived in San Francisco, and
by the time I'd crossed the ferry to Oakland I was my old self again, so
that even my wife looked in vain for any change in me.

Steve wrote to me once, and his letter seemed irritated. He took it kind
of hard because I'd left him with Spot. Also, he said he'd used the
"rough-on-rats," per directions, and that there was nothing doing. A
year went by. I was back in the office and prospering in all ways--even
getting a bit fat. And then Steve arrived. He didn't look me up. I read
his name in the steamer list, and wondered why. But I didn't wonder
long. I got up one morning and found that Spot chained to the gate-post
and holding up the milkman. Steve went north to Seattle, I learned, that
very morning. I didn't put on any more weight. My wife made me buy him a
collar and tag, and within an hour he showed his gratitude by killing
her pet Persian cat. There is no getting rid of that Spot. He will be
with me until I die, for he'll never die. My appetite is not so good
since he arrived, and my wife says I am looking peaked. Last night that
Spot got into Mr. Harvey's hen house (Harvey is my next door neighbor)
and killed nineteen of his fancy-bred chickens. I shall have to pay for
them. My neighbors on the other side quarreled with my wife and then
moved out. Spot was the cause of it. And that is why I am disappointed
in Stephen Mackaye. I had no idea he was so mean a man.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] From _Lost Face_. Copyright, 1910, by the Macmillan Company.
Reprinted by special permission of the publisher.




[Illustration]




VII.--When Lincoln Licked a Bully[7]

_By Irving Bacheller_

          _In "A Man For the Ages" Irving Bacheller tells
          the story of Abraham Lincoln's life and career in
          the form of a novel. He represents that the book
          is written by the grandson of one Samson Traylor,
          who is presented as a friend of Lincoln's. The
          story that follows is an abbreviation of the
          account of the journey of Samson Traylor and his
          wife and two children and their dog, Sambo, in
          1831, from Vergennes, Vermont, to the Illinois
          country; and the part "Abe" Lincoln, a clerk in
          Denton Offut's store at New Salem, had in building
          a log cabin for them upon their arrival there; and
          concludes by telling how Lincoln licked a
          bully._--THE EDITOR.


IN the early summer of 1831 Samson Traylor and his wife, Sarah, and two
children left their old home near the village of Vergennes, Vermont, and
began their travels toward the setting sun with four chairs, a bread
board and rolling-pin, a feather bed and blankets, a small
looking-glass, a skillet, an ax, a pack basket with a pad of sole
leather on the same, a water pail, a box of dishes, a tub of salt pork,
a rifle, a teapot, a sack of meal, sundry small provisions and a violin,
in a double wagon drawn by oxen. . . . A young black shepherd dog with
tawny points and the name of Sambo followed the wagon or explored the
fields and woods it passed.

The boy Josiah--familiarly called Joe--sits beside his mother. He is a
slender, sweet-faced boy. He is looking up wistfully at his mother. The
little girl Betsey sits between him and her father.

That evening they stopped at the house of an old friend some miles up
the dusty road to the north.

"Here we are--goin' west," Samson shouted to the man at the doorstep.

He alighted and helped his family out of the wagon.

"You go right in--I'll take care o' the oxen," said the man.

Samson started for the house with the girl under one arm and the boy
under the other. A pleasant-faced woman greeted them with a hearty
welcome at the door.

"You poor man! Come right in," she said.

"Poor! I'm the richest man in the world," said he. "Look at the gold on
that girl's head--curly, fine gold, too--the best there is. She's
Betsey--my little toy woman--half past seven years old--blue eyes--helps
her mother get tired every day. Here's my toy man Josiah--yes, brown
hair and brown eyes like Sarah--heart o' gold--helps his mother,
too--six times one year old."

"What pretty faces!" said the woman as she stooped and kissed them.

"Yes, ma'am. Got 'em from the fairies," Samson went on. "They have all
kinds o' heads for little folks, an' I guess they color 'em up with the
blood o' roses an' the gold o' buttercups an' the blue o' violets.
Here's this wife o' mine. She's richer'n I am. She owns all of us. We're
her slaves."

"Looks as young as she did the day she was married--nine years ago,"
said the woman.

"Exactly!" Samson exclaimed. "Straight as an arrow and proud! I don't
blame her. She's got enough to make her proud I say. I fall in love
again every time I look into her big brown eyes."

The talk and laughter brought the dog into the house.

"There's Sambo, our camp follower," said Samson. "He likes us, one and
all, but he often feels sorry for us because we cannot feel the joy that
lies in buried bones and the smell of a liberty pole or a gate post."

They had a joyous evening and a restful night with these old friends and
resumed their journey soon after daylight. They ferried across the lake
at Burlington and fared away over the mountains and through the deep
forest on the Chateaugay trail. . . .

They had read a little book called _The Country of the Sangamon_. The
latter was a word of the Pottawatomies meaning "land of plenty." It was
the name of a river in Illinois draining "boundless, flowery meadows of
unexampled beauty and fertility, belted with timber, blessed with shady
groves, covered with game and mostly level, without a stick or a stone
to vex the plowman." Thither they were bound to take up a section of
government land.

They stopped for a visit with Elisha Howard and his wife, old friends of
theirs, who lived in the village of Malone, which was in Franklin
County, New York. There they traded their oxen for a team of horses.
They were large gray horses named Pete and Colonel. The latter was fat
and good-natured. His chief interest in life was food. Pete was always
looking for food and perils. Colonel was the near horse. Now and then
Samson threw a sheepskin over his back and put the boy on it and tramped
along within arm's reach of Joe's left leg. This was a great delight to
the little lad.

They proceeded at a better pace to the Black River country, toward
which, in the village of Canton, they tarried again for a visit with
Captain Moody and Silas Wright, both of whom had taught school in the
town of Vergennes.

They proceeded through DeKalb, Richville and Gouverneur and Antwerp and
on to the Sand Plains. They had gone far out of their way for a look at
these old friends of theirs.

Every day the children would ask many questions, as they rode along,
mainly about the beasts and birds in the dark shadows of the forest
through which they passed. These were answered patiently by their father
and mother and every answer led to other queries.

"You're a funny pair," said their father one day. "You have to turn over
every word we say to see what's under it. I used to be just like ye,
used to go out in the lot and tip over every stick and stone I could
lift to see the bugs and crickets run. You're always hopin' to see a
bear or a panther or a fairy run out from under my remarks."

"Wonder why we don't see no bears?" Joe asked.

"'Cause they always see us first or hear us comin'," said his father.
"If you're goin' to see ol' Uncle Bear ye got to pay the price of
admission."

"What's that?" Joe asked.

"Got to go still and careful so you'll see him first. If this old wagon
didn't talk so loud and would kind o' go on its tiptoes maybe we'd see
him. He don't like to be seen. Seems so he was kind o' shamed of
himself, an' I wouldn't wonder if he was. He's done a lot o' things to
be 'shamed of."

"What's he done?" Joe asked.

"Ketched sheep and pigs and fawns and run off with 'em."

"What does he do with 'em?"

"Eats 'em up. Now you quit. Here's a lot o' rocks and mud and I got to
tend to business. You tackle yer mother and chase her up and down the
hills a while and let me get my breath."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the twenty-ninth day after their journey began they came in sight of
the beautiful green valley of the Mohawk. As they looked from the hills
they saw the roof of the forest dipping down to the river shores and
stretching far to the east and west and broken, here and there, by small
clearings. Soon they could see the smoke and spires of the thriving
village of Utica.

Here they bought provisions and a tin trumpet for Joe, and a doll with a
real porcelain face for Betsey, and turned into the great main
thoroughfare of the north leading eastward to Boston and westward to a
shore of the midland seas. This road was once the great trail of the
Iroquois, by them called the Long House, because it had reached from the
Hudson to Lake Erie, and in their day had been well roofed with foliage.
Here the travelers got their first view of a steam engine. The latter
stood puffing and smoking near the village of Utica, to the horror and
amazement of the team and the great excitement of those in the wagon.
The boy clung to his father for fear of it.

Samson longed to get out of the wagon and take a close look at the noisy
monster, but his horses were rearing in their haste to get away, and
even a short stop was impossible. Sambo, with his tail between his
legs, ran ahead, in a panic, and took refuge in some bushes by the
roadside.

"What was that, father?" the boy asked when the horses had ceased to
worry over this new peril.

"A steam engyne," he answered. "Sarah, did ye get a good look at it?"

"Yes; if that don't beat all the newfangled notions I ever heard of,"
she exclaimed.

"It's just begun doin' business," said Samson.

"What does it do?" Joe asked.

"On a railroad track it can grab hold of a house full o' folks and run
off with it. Goes like the wind, too."

"Does it eat 'em up?" Joe asked.

"No. It eats wood and oil and keeps yellin' for more. I guess it could
eat a cord o' wood and wash it down with half a bucket o' castor oil in
about five minutes. It snatches folks away to some place and drops 'em.
I guess it must make their hair stand up and their teeth chatter."

"Does it hurt anybody?" Joe asked hopefully.

"Well, sir, if anybody wanted to be hurt and got in its way, I rather
guess he'd succeed purty well. It's powerful. Why, if a man was to ketch
hold of the tail of a locomotive, and hang on, it would jerk the toe
nails right off him."

Joe began to have great respect for locomotives.

Soon they came in view of the famous Erie Canal, hard by the road.
Through it the grain of the far West had just begun moving eastward in a
tide that was flowing from April to December. Big barges, drawn by mules
and horses on its shore, were cutting the still waters of the canal.
They stopped and looked at the barges and the long tow ropes and the
tugging animals.

"There is a real artificial river, hundreds o' miles long, handmade of
the best material, water tight, no snags or rocks or other
imperfections, durability guaranteed," said Samson. "It has made the
name of DeWitt Clinton known everywhere."

"I wonder what next!" Sarah exclaimed.

They met many teams and passed other movers going west, and some
prosperous farms on a road wider and smoother than any they had
traveled. They camped that night, close by the river, with a Connecticut
family on its way to Ohio with a great load of household furniture on
one wagon and seven children in another. There were merry hours for the
young, and pleasant visiting between the older folk that evening at the
fireside. There was much talk among the latter about the great Erie
Canal.

So they fared along through Canandaigua and across the Genesee to the
village of Rochester and on through Lewiston and up the Niagara River to
the Falls, and camped where they could see the great water flood and
hear its muffled thunder. . . .

"Children," said Samson, "I want you to take a good look at that. It's
the most wonderful thing in the world and maybe you'll never see it
again."

"The Indians used to think that the Great Spirit was in this river,"
said Sarah.

"Kind o' seems to me they were right," Samson remarked thoughtfully.
"Kind o' seems as if the great spirit of America was in that water. It
moves on in the way it wills and nothing can stop it. Everything in its
current goes along with it. . . ."

They had the lake view and its cool breeze on their way to Silver Creek,
Dunkirk and Erie, and a rough way it was in those days.

       *       *       *       *       *

They fared along through Indiana and over the wide savannas of Illinois,
and on the ninety-seventh day of their journey they drove through
rolling, grassy, flowering prairies and up a long, hard hill to the
small log cabin settlement of New Salem, Illinois, on the shore of the
Sangamon. They halted about noon in the middle of this little prairie
village, opposite a small clapboarded house. A sign hung over its door
which bore the rudely lettered words: "Rutledge's Tavern."

A long, slim, stoop-shouldered young man sat in the shade of an oak tree
that stood near a corner of the tavern, with a number of children
playing around him. He had sat leaning against the tree trunk reading a
book. He had risen as they came near and stood looking at them, with the
book under his arm. . . .

He wore a hickory shirt without a collar or coat or jacket. One
suspender held up his coarse, linsey trousers, the legs of which fitted
closely and came only to a blue yarn zone above his heavy cowhide shoes.
Samson writes that he "fetched a sneeze and wiped his big nose with a
red handkerchief" as he stood surveying them in silence, while Dr. John
Allen, who had sat on the doorstep reading a paper--a kindly-faced man
of middle age with a short white beard under his chin--greeted them
cheerfully.

The withering sunlight of a day late in August fell upon the dusty
street, now almost deserted. Faces at the doors and windows of the
little houses were looking out at them. Two ragged boys and a
ginger-colored dog came running toward the wagon. The latter and Sambo
surveyed each other with raised hair and began scratching the earth,
straight-legged, whining meanwhile, and in a moment began to play
together. A man in blue jeans who sat on the veranda of a store
opposite, leaning against its wall, stopped whittling and shut his
jacknife.

"Where do ye hail from?" the Doctor asked.

"Vermont," said Samson.

"All the way in that wagon?"

"Yes, sir."

"I guess you're made o' the right stuff," said the Doctor. "Where ye
bound?"

"Don't know exactly. Going to take up a claim somewhere."

"There's no better country than right here. This is the Canaan of
America. We need people like you. Unhitch your team and have some dinner
and we'll talk things over after you're rested. I'm the doctor here and
I ride all over this part o' the country. I reckon I know it pretty
well."

A woman in a neat calico dress came out of the door--a strong built and
rather well favored woman with blond hair and dark eyes.

"Mrs. Rutledge, these are travelers from the East," said the Doctor.
"Give 'em some dinner, and if they can't pay for it, I can. They've come
all the way from Vermont."

"Good land! Come right in an' rest yerselves. Abe, you show the
gentleman where to put his horses an' lend him a hand."

Abe extended his long arm toward Samson and said "Howdy" as they shook
hands.

"When his big hand got hold of mine, I kind of felt his timber," Samson
writes. "I says to myself, 'There's a man it would be hard to tip over
in a rassle.'"

"What's yer name? How long ye been travelin'? My conscience! Ain't ye
wore out?" the hospitable Mrs. Rutledge was asking as she went into the
house with Sarah and the children. "You go and mix up with the little
ones and let yer mother rest while I git dinner," she said to Joe and
Betsey, and added as she took Sarah's shawl and bonnet: "You lop down
an' rest yerself while I'm flyin' around the fire."

"Come all the way from Vermont?" Abe asked as he and Samson were
unhitching.

"Yes, sir."

"By jing!" the slim giant exclaimed. "I reckon you feel like throwin'
off yer harness an' takin' a roll in the grass."

       *       *       *       *       *

The tavern was the only house in New Salem with stairs in it. Stairs so
steep, as Samson writes, that "they were first cousins to the ladder."
There were four small rooms above them. Two of these were parted by a
partition of cloth hanging from the rafters. In each was a bed and
bedstead and smaller beds on the floor. In case there were a number of
adult guests the bedstead was screened with sheets hung upon strings.

In one of these rooms the travelers had a night of refreshing sleep.

After riding two days with the Doctor, Samson bought the claim of one
Isaac Gollaher to a half section of land a little more than a mile from
the western end of the village. He chose a site for his house on the
edge of an open prairie.

"Now we'll go over and see Abe," said Dr. Allen, after the deal was
made. "He's the best man with an ax and a saw in this part of the
country. He clerks for Mr. Offut. Abe Lincoln is one of the best fellows
that ever lived--a rough diamond just out of the great mine of the
West, that only needs to be cut and polished."

Denton Offut's store was a small log structure about twenty by twenty
which stood near the brow of the hill east of Rutledge's Tavern. When
they entered it Abe lay at full length on the counter, his head resting
on a bolt of blue denim as he studied a book in his hand. He wore the
same shirt and one suspender and linsey trousers which he had worn in
the dooryard of the tavern, but his feet were covered only by his blue
yarn socks.

Abe laid aside his book and rose to a sitting posture.

"Mr. Traylor," said Doctor Allen, "has just acquired an interest in all
our institutions. He has bought the Gollaher tract and is going to build
a house and some fences. Abe, couldn't you help get the timber out in a
hurry so we can have a raising within a week? You know the art of the ax
better than any of us."

Abe looked at Samson.

"I reckon he and I would make a good team with the ax," he said. "He
looks as if he could push a house down with one hand and build it up
with the other. You can bet I'll be glad to help in any way I can."

Next morning at daylight two parties went out in the woods to cut timber
for the home of the newcomers. In one party were Harry Needles carrying
two axes and a well-filled luncheon pail; Samson with a saw in his hand
and the boy Joe on his back; Abe with saw and ax and a small jug of root
beer and a book tied in a big red handkerchief and slung around his
neck. When they reached the woods Abe cut a pole for the small boy and
carried him on his shoulder to the creek and said:

"Now you sit down here and keep order in this little frog city. If you
hear a frog say anything improper you fetch him a whack. Don't allow any
nonsense. We'll make you Mayor of Frog City."

The men fell to with axes and saws while Harry limbed the logs and
looked after the Mayor. Their huge muscles flung the sharp axes into the
timber and gnawed through it with a saw. Many big trees fell before
noontime when they stopped for luncheon. While they were eating Abe
said:

"I reckon we better saw out a few boards this afternoon. Need 'em for
the doors. We'll tote a couple of logs up on the side o' that knoll, put
'em on skids an' whip 'em up into boards with the saw."

Samson took hold of the middle of one of the logs and raised it from the
ground.

"I guess we can carry 'em," he said.

"Can ye shoulder it?" Abe asked.

"Easy," said Samson as he raised an end of the log, stepped beneath it
and, resting its weight on his back, soon got his shoulder near its
center and swung it clear of the ground and walked with it to the
knollside where he let it fall with a resounding thump that shook the
ground. Abe stopped eating and watched every move in this remarkable
performance. The ease with which the big Vermonter had so defied the law
of gravitation with that unwieldly stick amazed him.

"That thing'll weigh from seven to eight hundred pounds," said he. "I
reckon you're the stoutest man in this part o' the state an' I'm quite a
man myself. I've lifted a barrel o' whisky and put my mouth to the bung
hole. I never drink it."

"Say," he added as he sat down and began eating a doughnut. "If you ever
hit anybody take a sledge hammer or a crowbar. It wouldn't be decent to
use your fist."

"Don't talk when you've got food in your mouth," said Joe who seemed to
have acquired a sense of responsibility for the manners of Abe.

"I reckon you're right," Abe laughed. "A man's ideas ought not to be
mingled with cheese and doughnuts."

"Once in a while I like to try myself in a lift," said Samson. "It feels
good. I don't do it to show off. I know there's a good many men stouter
than I be. I guess you're one of 'em."

"No, I'm too stretched out--my neck is too far from the ground," Abe
answered. "I'm like a crowbar. If I can get my big toe or my fingers
under anything I can pry some."

After luncheon he took off his shoes and socks.

"When I'm working hard I always try to give my feet a rest and my brain
a little work at noontime," he remarked. "My brain is so far behind the
procession I have to keep putting the gad on it. Give me twenty minutes
of Kirkham and I'll be with you again."

He lay down on his back under a tree with his book in hand and his feet
resting on the tree trunk well above him. Soon he was up and at work
again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they were getting ready to go home that afternoon Joe got into a
great hurry to see his mother. It seemed to him that ages had elapsed
since he had seen her--a conviction which led to noisy tears.

Abe knelt before him and comforted the boy. Then he wrapped him in his
jacket and swung him in the air and started for home with Joe astride
his neck.

Samson says in his diary: "His tender play with the little lad gave me
another look at the man Lincoln."

"Some one proposed once that we should call that stream the Minnehaha,"
said Abe as he walked along. "After this Joe and I are going to call it
the Minneboohoo."

The women of the little village had met at a quilting party at ten
o'clock with Mrs. Martin Waddell. There Sarah had had a seat at the
frame and heard all the gossip of the countryside. . . .

So the day passed with them and was interrupted by the noisy entrance of
Joe, soon after candlelight, who climbed on the back of his mother's
chair and kissed her and in breathless eagerness began to relate the
history of his own day.

That ended the quilting party and Sarah and Mrs. Rutledge and her
daughter Ann joined Samson and Abe and Harry Needles who were waiting
outside and walked to the tavern with them.

John McNeil, whom the Traylors had met on the road near Niagara Falls
and who had shared their camp with them, arrived on the stage that
evening. . . . Abe came in, soon after eight o'clock, and was introduced
to the stranger. All noted the contrast between the two young men as
they greeted each other. Abe sat down for a few minutes and looked sadly
into the fire but said nothing. He rose presently, excused himself and
went away.

Soon Samson followed him. Over at Offut's store he did not find Abe, but
Bill Berry was drawing liquor from the spigot of a barrel set on blocks
in a shed connected with the rear end of the store and serving it to a
number of hilarious young Irishmen. The young men asked Samson to join
them.

"No, thank you. I never touch it," he said.

"We'll come over here an' learn ye how to enjoy yerself some day," one
of them said.

"I'm pretty well posted on that subject now," Samson answered.

It is likely that they would have begun his schooling at once but when
they came out into the store and saw the big Vermonter standing in the
candlelight their laughter ceased for a moment. Bill was among them
with a well-filled bottle in his hand.

He and the others got into a wagon which had been waiting at the door
and drove away with a wild Indian whoop from the lips of one of the
young men.

Samson sat down in the candlelight and Abe in a moment arrived.

"I'm getting awful sick o' this business," said Abe.

"I kind o' guess you don't like the whisky part of it," Samson remarked,
as he felt a piece of cloth.

"I hate it," Abe went on. "It don't seem respectable any longer."

"Back in Vermont we don't like the whisky business."

"You're right, it breeds deviltry and disorder. In my youth I was
surrounded by whisky. Everybody drank it. A bottle or a jug of liquor
was thought to be as legitimate a piece of merchandise as a pound of tea
or a yard of calico. That's the way I've always thought of it. But
lately I've begun to get the Yankee notion about whisky. When it gets
into bad company it can raise the devil."

Soon after nine o'clock Abe drew a mattress filled with corn husks from
under the counter, cleared away the bolts of cloth and laid it where
they had been and covered it with a blanket.

"This is my bed," said he. "I'll be up at five in the morning. Then I'll
be making tea here by the fireplace to wash down some jerked meat and a
hunk o' bread. At six or a little after I'll be ready to go with you
again. Jack Kelso is going to look after the store to-morrow."

He began to laugh.

"Ye know when I went out of the tavern that little vixen stood peekin'
into the window--Bim, Jack's girl," said Abe. "I asked her why she
didn't go in and she said she was scared. 'Who you 'fraid of?' I asked.
'Oh, I reckon that boy,' says she. And honestly her hand trembled when
she took hold of my arm and walked to her father's house with me."

Abe snickered as he spread another blanket. "What a cut-up she is! Say,
we'll have some fun watching them two I reckon," he said.

The logs were ready two days after the cutting began. Martin Waddell and
Samuel Hill sent teams to haul them. John Cameron and Peter Lukins had
brought the window sash and some clapboards from Beardstown in a small
flat boat. Then came the day of the raising--a clear, warm day early in
September. All the men from the village and the near farms gathered to
help make a home for the newcomers. Samson and Jack Kelso went out for a
hunt after the cutting and brought in a fat buck and many grouse for the
bee dinner, to which every woman of the neighborhood made a contribution
of cake or pie or cookies or doughnuts.

"What will be my part?" Samson had inquired of Kelso.

"Nothing but a jug of whisky and a kind word and a house warming," Kelso
had answered.

They notched and bored the logs and made pins to bind them and cut those
that were to go around the fireplace and window spaces. Strong, willing
and well-trained hands hewed and fitted the logs together. Alexander
Ferguson lined the fireplace with a curious mortar made of clay in which
he mixed grass for a binder. This mortar he rolled into layers called
"cats," each eight inches long and three inches thick. Then he laid them
against the logs and held them in place with a woven network of sticks.
The first fire--a slow one--baked the clay into a rigid stonelike sheath
inside the logs and presently the sticks were burned away. The women had
cooked the meats by an open fire and spread the dinner on a table of
rough boards resting on poles set in crotches. At noon one of them
sounded a conch shell. Then with shouts of joy the men hurried to the
fireside and for a moment there was a great spluttering over the wash
basins. Before they ate every man except Abe and Samson "took a pull at
the jug--long or short"--to quote a phrase of the time.

It was a cheerful company that sat down upon the grass around the table
with loaded plates. Their food had its extra seasoning of merry jests
and loud laughter. Sarah was a little shocked at the forthright
directness of their eating, no knives or forks or napkins being needed
in that process. Having eaten, washed and packed away their dishes the
women went home at two. Before they had gone Samson's ears caught a
thunder of horses' feet in the distance. Looking in its direction he saw
a cloud of dust in the road and a band of horsemen riding toward them at
full speed. Abe came to him and said:

"I see the boys from Clary's Grove are coming. If they get mean let me
deal with 'em. It's my responsibility. I wouldn't wonder if they had
some of Offut's whisky with them."

The boys arrived in a cloud of dust and a chorus of Indian whoops and
dismounted and hobbled their horses. They came toward the workers, led
by burly Jack Armstrong, a stalwart, hard-faced blacksmith of about
twenty-two with broad, heavy shoulders, whose name has gone into
history. They had been drinking some but no one of them was in the least
degree off his balance. They scuffled around the jug for a moment in
perfect good nature and then Abe and Mrs. Waddell provided them with the
best remnants of the dinner. They were rather noisy. Soon they went up
on the roof to help with the rafters and the clapboarding. They worked
well a few minutes and suddenly they came scrambling down for another
pull at the jug. They were out for a spree and Abe knew it and knew
further that they had reached the limit of discretion.

"Boys, there are ladies here and we've got to be careful," he said. "Did
I ever tell you what Uncle Jerry Holman said of his bull calf? He said
the calf was such a _suckcess_ that he didn't leave any milk for the
family and that while the calf was growin' fat the children was growin'
poor. In my opinion you're about fat enough for the present. Let's stick
to the job till four o'clock. Then we'll knock off for refreshments."

The young revelers gathered in a group and began to whisper together.
Samson writes that it became evident then they were going to make
trouble and says:

          "We had left the children at Rutledge's in the
          care of Ann. I went to Sarah and told her she had
          better go on and see if they were all right.

          "'Don't you get in any fight,' she said, which
          shows that the women knew what was in the air.

          "Sarah led the way and the others followed her."

Those big, brawny fellows from the grove when they got merry were
looking always for a chance to get mad at some man and turn him into a
plaything. A victim had been a necessary part of their sprees. Many a
poor fellow had been fastened in a barrel and rolled down hill or nearly
drowned in a ducking for their amusement. A chance had come to get mad
and they were going to make the most of it. They began to growl with
resentment. Some were wigging their leader Jack Armstrong to fight Abe.
One of them ran to his horse and brought a bottle from his saddlebag. It
began passing from mouth to mouth. Jack Armstrong got the bottle before
it was half emptied, drained it and flung it high in the air. Another
called him a hog and grappled him around the waist and there was a
desperate struggle which ended quickly. Armstrong got a hold on the neck
of his assailant and choked him until he let go. This was not enough for
the sturdy bully of Clary's Grove. He seized his follower and flung him
so roughly on the ground that the latter lay for a moment stunned.
Armstrong had got his blood warm and was now ready for action. With a
wild whoop he threw off his coat, unbuttoned his right shirtsleeve and
rolled it to the shoulder and declared in a loud voice, as he swung his
arm in the air, that he could "outjump, outhop, outrun, throw down, drag
out an' lick any man in New Salem."

In a letter to his father Samson writes:

          "Abe was working at my elbow. I saw him drop his
          hammer and get up and make for the ladder. I knew
          something was going to happen and I followed him.
          In a minute every one was off the roof and out of
          the building. I guess they knew what was coming.
          The big lad stood there swinging his arm and
          yelling like an Injun. It was a big arm and
          muscled and corded up some but I guess if I'd
          shoved the calico off mine and held it up he'd a
          pulled down his sleeve. I suppose the feller's arm
          had a kind of a mule's kick in it, but, good
          gracious! If he'd a seen as many arms as you an' I
          have that have growed up on a hickory helve he'd a
          known that his was nothing to brag of. I didn't
          know just how good a man Abe was and I was kind o'
          scairt for a minute. I never found it so hard work
          to do nothin' as I did then. Honest my hands kind
          o' ached. I wanted to go an' cuff that feller's
          ears an' grab hold o' him an' toss him over the
          ridge pole. Abe went right up to him an' said:

          "'Jack, you ain't half so bad or half so cordy as
          ye think ye are. You say you can throw down any
          man here. I reckon I'll have to show ye that
          you're mistaken. I'll rassle with ye. We're
          friends an' we won't talk about lickin' each
          other. Le's have a friendly rassle.'

          "In a second the two men were locked together.
          Armstrong had lunged at Abe with a yell. There was
          no friendship in the way he took hold. He was
          going to do all the damage he could in any way he
          could. He tried to butt with his head and ram his
          knee into Abe's stomach as soon as they came
          together. Half-drunk Jack is a man who would bite
          your ear off. It was no rassle; it was a fight.
          Abe moved like lightning. He acted awful limber
          an' well-greased. In a second he had got hold of
          the feller's neck with his big right hand and
          hooked his left into the cloth on his hip. In that
          way he held him off and shook him as you've seen
          our dog shake a woodchuck. Abe's blood was hot. If
          the whole crowd had piled on him I guess he would
          have come out all right, for when he's roused
          there's something in Abe more than bones and
          muscles. I suppose it's what I feel when he speaks
          a piece. It's a kind of lightning. I guess it's
          what our minister used to call the power of the
          spirit. Abe said to me afterwards that he felt as
          if he was fighting for the peace and honor of New
          Salem.

          "A friend of the bully jumped in and tried to
          trip Abe. Harry Needles stood beside me. Before I
          could move he dashed forward and hit that feller
          in the middle of his forehead and knocked him
          flat. Harry had hit Bap McNoll the cock fighter. I
          got up next to the kettle then and took the scum
          off it. Fetched one of them devils a slap with the
          side of my hand that took the skin off his face
          and rolled him over and over. When I looked again
          Armstrong was going limp. His mouth was open and
          his tongue out. With one hand fastened to his
          right leg and the other on the nape of his neck
          Abe lifted him at arm's length and gave him a toss
          in the air. Armstrong fell about ten feet from
          where Abe stood and lay there for a minute. The
          fight was all out of him and he was kind of dazed
          and sick. Abe stood up like a giant and his face
          looked awful solemn.

          "'Boys, if there's any more o' you that want
          trouble you can have some off the same piece,' he
          said.

          "They hung their heads and not one of them made a
          move or said a word. Abe went to Armstrong and
          helped him up.

          "'Jack, I'm sorry that I had to hurt you,' he
          said. 'You get on to your horse and go home.'

          "'Abe, you're a better man than me,' said the
          bully, as he offered his hand to Abe. 'I'll do
          anything you say.'"

So the Clary's Grove gang was conquered. They were to make more trouble
but not again were they to imperil the foundations of law and order in
the little community of New Salem.

FOOTNOTE:

[7] From _A Man For the Ages_. Copyright, 1919, by the Bobbs-Merrill
Company. Used by special permission of the publishers.




[Illustration]




VIII.--The End of the Trail[8]

_By Clarence E. Mulford_

          _Buck Peters, foreman of Bar-20 Ranch had many
          cowboys; Pete Wilson, Red Connors, Billy Williams,
          Johnny Nelson, and a goodly number more, but chief
          among them was Hopalong Cassidy. Many interesting
          stories are told about him in "Bar-20 Days" but
          none of his thrilling experiences ever ended as
          did the one recited in this most unusual story,
          "The End of the Trail."_--THE EDITOR.


WHEN one finds on his ranch the carcasses of two cows on the same day,
and both are skinned, there can be only one conclusion. The killing and
skinning of two cows out of herds that are numbered by thousands need
not, in themselves, bring lines of worry to any foreman's brow; but
there is the sting of being cheated, the possibility of the losses going
higher unless a sharp lesson be given upon the folly of fooling with a
very keen and active buzz-saw,--and it was the determination of the
outfit of the Bar-20 to teach that lesson, and as quickly as
circumstances would permit.

It was common knowledge that there was a more or less organized band of
shiftless malcontents making its headquarters in and near Perry's Bend,
some distance up the river, and the deduction in this case was easy. The
Bar-20 cared very little about what went on at Perry's Bend--that was a
matter which concerned only the ranches near that town--so long as no
vexatious happenings sifted too far south. But they had so sifted, and
Perry's Bend, or rather the undesirable class hanging out there, was due
to receive a shock before long.

About a week after the finding of the first skinned cows, Pete Wilson
tornadoed up to the bunk house with a perforated arm. Pete was on foot,
having lost his horse at the first exchange of shots, which accounts for
the expression describing his arrival. Pete hated to walk, he hated
still more to get shot, and most of all he hated to have to admit that
his rifle-shooting was so far below par. He had seen the thief at work
and, too eager to work up close to the cattle skinner before announcing
his displeasure, had missed the first shot. When he dragged himself out
from under his deceased horse the scenery was undisturbed save for a
small cloud of dust hovering over a distant rise to the north of him.
After delivering a short and bitter monologue he struck out for the
ranch and arrived in a very hot and wrathful condition. It was
contagious, that condition, and before long the entire outfit was in
the saddle and pounding north, Pete overjoyed because his wound was so
slight as not to bar him from the chase. The shock was on the way, and
as events proved, was to be one long to linger in the minds of the
inhabitants of Perry's Bend and the surrounding range.

       *       *       *       *       *

The patrons of the Oasis liked their tobacco strong. The pungent smoke
drifted in sluggish clouds along the low, black ceiling, following its
upward slant toward the east wall and away from the high bar at the
other end. This bar, rough and strong, ran from the north wall to within
a scant two feet of the south wall, the opening bridged by a hinged
board which served as an extension to the counter. Behind the bar was a
rear door, low and double, the upper part barred securely--the lower
part was used most. In front of and near the bar was a large round
table, at which four men played cards silently, while two smaller tables
were located along the north wall. Besides dilapidated chairs there were
half a dozen low wooden boxes partly filled with sand, and attention was
directed to the existence and purpose of these by a roughly lettered
sign on the wall, reading: "Gents will look for a box first," which the
"gents" sometimes did. The majority of the "gents" preferred to aim at
various knotholes in the floor and bet on the result, chancing the
outpouring of the proprietor's wrath if they missed.

On the wall behind the bar was a smaller and neater request: "Leave your
guns with the bartender.--Edwards." This, although a month old, still
called forth caustic and profane remarks from the regular frequenters of
the saloon, for hitherto restraint in the matter of carrying weapons had
been unknown. They forthwith evaded the order in a manner consistent
with their characteristics--by carrying smaller guns where they could
not be seen. The majority had simply sawed off a generous part of the
long barrels of their Colts and Remingtons, which did not improve their
accuracy.

Edwards, the new marshal of Perry's Bend, had come direct from Kansas
and his reputation as a fighter had preceded him. When he took up his
first day's work he was kept busy proving that he was the rightful owner
of it and that it had not been exaggerated in any manner or degree. With
the exception of one instance the proof had been bloodless, for he
reasoned that gun-play should give way, whenever possible, to a crushing
"right" or "left" to the point of the jaw or the pit of the stomach. His
proficiency in the manly art was polished and thorough and bespoke
earnest application. The last doubting Thomas to be convinced came to
five minutes after his diaphragm had been rudely and suddenly raised
several inches by a low right hook, and as he groped for his bearings
and got his wind back again he asked, very feebly, where "Kansas" was;
and the name stuck.

The marshal did not like the Oasis; indeed, he went further and
cordially hated it. Harlan's saloon was a thorn in his side and he was
only waiting for a good excuse to wipe it off the local map. He was the
Law, and behind him were the range riders, who would be only too glad to
have the nest of rustlers wiped out and its gang of ne'er-do-wells
scattered to the four winds. Indeed, he had been given to understand in
a most polite and diplomatic way that if this were not done lawfully,
they would try to do it themselves, and they had great faith in their
ability to handle the situation in a thorough and workmanlike manner.
This would not do in a law-abiding community, as he called the town, and
so he had replied that the work was his, and that it would be performed
as soon as he believed himself justified to act. Harlan and his friends
were fully conversant with the feeling against them and had become a
little more cautious, alertly watching out for trouble.

On the evening of the day which saw Pete Wilson's discomfiture most of
the _habitues_ had assembled in the Oasis where, besides the
card-players already mentioned, eight men lounged against the bar. There
was some laughter, much subdued talking, and a little whispering. More
whispering went on under that roof than in all the other places in town
put together; for here rustling was planned, wayfaring strangers were
"trimmed" in "frame-up" at cards, and a hunted man was certain to find
assistance. Harlan had once boasted that no fugitive had ever been
taken from his saloon, and he was behind the bar and standing on the
trap door which led to the six-by-six cellar when he made the assertion.
It was true, for only those in his confidence knew of the place of
refuge under the floor: it had been dug at night and the dirt carefully
disposed of.

It had not been dark very long before talking ceased and card-playing
was suspended while all looked up as the front door crashed open and two
punchers entered, looking the crowd over with critical care.

"Stay here, Johnny," Hopalong told his youthful companion, and then
walked forward, scrutinizing each scowling face in turn, while Johnny
stood with his back to the door, keenly alert, his right hand resting
lightly on his belt not far from the holster.

Harlan's thick neck grew crimson and his eyes hard. "Lookin' fer
something?" he asked with bitter sarcasm, his hands under the bar.
Johnny grinned hopefully and a sudden tenseness took possession of him
as he watched for the first hostile move.

"Yes," Hopalong replied coolly, appraising Harlan's attitude and look in
one swift glance, "but it ain't here, now. Johnny, get out," he ordered,
backing after his companion, and safely outside, the two walked towards
Jackson's store, Johnny complaining about the little time spent in the
Oasis.

As they entered the store they saw Edwards, whose eyes asked a
question.

"No; he ain't in there yet," Hopalong replied.

"Did you look all over? Behind th' bar?" Edwards asked, slowly. "He
can't get out of town through that cordon you've got strung around it,
an' he ain't nowhere else. Leastwise, I couldn't find him."

"Come on back!" excitedly exclaimed Johnny, turning towards the door.
"You didn't look behind th' bar! Come on--bet you ten dollars that's
where he is!"

"Mebby yo're right, Kid," replied Hopalong, and the marshal's nodding
head decided it.

In the saloon there was strong language, and Jack Quinn, expert skinner
of other men's cows, looked inquiringly at the proprietor. "What's up
now, Harlan?"

The proprietor laughed harshly but said nothing--taciturnity was his one
redeeming trait. "Did you say cigars?" he asked, pushing a box across
the bar to an impatient customer. Another beckoned to him and he leaned
over to hear the whispered request, a frown struggling to show itself on
his face. "Nix; you know my rule. No trust in here."

But the man at the far end of the line was unlike the proprietor and he
prefaced his remarks with a curse. "_I_ know what's up! They want Jerry
Brown, that's what! An' I hopes they don't get him, th' bullies!"

"What did he do? Why do they want him?" asked the man who had wanted
trust.

"Skinning. He was careless or crazy, working so close to their ranch
houses. Nobody that had any sense would take a chance like that,"
replied Boston, adept at sleight-of-hand with cards and very much in
demand when a frame-up was to be rung in on some unsuspecting stranger.
His one great fault in the eyes of his partners was that he hated to
divvy his winnings and at times had to be coerced into sharing equally.

"Aw, them big ranches make me mad," announced the first speaker. "Ten
years ago there was a lot of little ranchers, an' every one of 'em had
his own herd, an' plenty of free grass an' water fer it. Where are th'
little herds now? Where are th' cows that we used to own?" he cried,
hotly. "What happens to a maverick-hunter, nowadays? If a man helps
hisself to a pore, sick dogie he's hunted down! It can't go on much
longer, an' that's shore."

Slivers Lowe leaped up from his chair. "Yo're right, Harper! Dead right!
_I_ was a little cattle owner onct, so was you, an' Jerry, an' most of
us!" Slivers found it convenient to forget that fully half of his small
herd had perished in the bitter and long winter of five years before,
and that the remainder had either flowed down his parched throat or been
lost across the big round table near the bar. Not a few of his cows were
banked in the East under Harlan's name.

The rear door opened slightly and one of the loungers looked up and
nodded. "It's all right Jerry. But get a move on!"

"Here, _you_!" called Harlan, quickly bending over the trap door,
"_Lively!_"

Jerry was halfway to the proprietor when the front door swung open and
Hopalong, closely followed by the marshal, leaped into the room, and
immediately thereafter the back door banged open and admitted Johnny.
Jerry's right hand was in his side coat pocket and Johnny, young and
self-confident, and with a lot to learn, was certain that he could beat
the fugitive on the draw.

"I reckon you won't blot no more brands!" he cried, triumphantly,
watching both Jerry and Harlan.

The card-players had leaped to their feet and at a signal from Harlan
they surged forward to the bar and formed a barrier between Johnny and
his friends; and as they did so that puncher jerked at his gun, twisting
to half face the crowd. At that instant fire and smoke spurted from
Jerry's side coat pocket and the odor of burning cloth arose. As Johnny
fell, the rustler ducked low and sprang for the door. A gun roared twice
in the front of the room and Jerry staggered a little and cursed as he
gained the opening, but he plunged into the darkness and threw himself
into the saddle on the first horse he found in the small corral.

When the crowd massed, Hopalong leaped at it and strove to tear his way
to the opening at the end of the bar, while the marshal covered Harlan
and the others. Finding that he could not get through, Hopalong sprang
on the shoulder of the nearest man and succeeded in winging the fugitive
at the first shot, the other going wild. Then, frantic with rage and
anxiety, he beat his way through the crowd, hammering mercilessly at
heads with the butt of his Colt, and knelt at his friend's side.

Edwards, angered almost to the point of killing, ordered the crowd to
stand against the wall, and laughed viciously when he saw two men
senseless on the floor. "Hope he beat in yore heads!" he gritted,
savagely. "Harlan, put yore paws up in sight or I'll drill you clean!
Now climb over an' get in line--quick!"

Johnny moaned and opened his eyes. "Did--did I--get him?"

"No; but he gimleted you, all right," Hopalong replied. "You'll come
'round if you keep quiet." He arose, his face hard with the desire to
kill. "I'm coming back for _you_, Harlan, after I get yore friend! An'
all th' rest of you pups, too!"

"Get me out of here," whispered Johnny.

"Shore enough, Kid; but keep quiet," replied Hopalong, picking him up in
his arms and moving carefully towards the door. "We'll get him, Johnny;
an' all th' rest, too, when"--the voice died out in the direction of
Jackson's and the marshal, backing to the front door, slipped out and to
one side, running backward, his eyes on the saloon.

"Yore day's about over, Harlan," he muttered.

"There's going to be some few funerals around here before many hours
pass."

When he reached the store he found the owner and two Double-Arrow
punchers taking care of Johnny. "Where's Hopalong?" he asked.

"Gone to tell his foreman," replied Jackson. "Hey, youngster, you let
them bandages alone! Hear me?"

"Hullo, Kansas," remarked John Bartlett, foreman of the Double-Arrow. "I
come nigh getting yore man; somebody rode past me like a streak in th'
dark, so I just ups an' lets drive for luck, an' so did he. I heard him
cuss an' I emptied my gun after him."

       *       *       *       *       *

The rain slanted down in sheets and the broken plain, thoroughly
saturated, held the water in pools or sent it down the steep side of the
cliff to feed the turbulent flood which swept along the bottom,
foam-flecked and covered with swiftly moving driftwood. Around a bend
where the angry water flung itself against the ragged bulwark of rock
and flashed away in a gleaming line of foam, a horseman appeared,
bending low in the saddle for better protection against the storm. He
rode along the edge of the stream on the farther bank, opposite the
steep bluff on the northern side, forcing his wounded and jaded horse to
keep fetlock deep in the water which swirled and sucked about its legs.
He was trying his hardest to hide his trail. Lower down the hard, rocky
ground extended to the water's edge, and if he could delay his pursuers
for an hour or so, he felt that, even with his tired horse, he would
have more than an even chance.

But they had gained more than he knew. Suddenly above him on the top of
the steep bluff across the torrent a man loomed up against the clouds,
peered intently and then waved his sombrero to an unseen companion. A
puff of smoke flashed from his shoulder and streaked away, the report of
the shot lost in the gale. The fugitive's horse reared and plunged into
the deep water and with its rider was swept rapidly towards the bend,
the way they had come.

"That makes th' fourth time I've missed that coyote!" angrily exclaimed
Hopalong as Red Connors joined him.

The other quickly raised his rifle and fired; and the horse, spilling
its rider out of the saddle, floated away tail first. The fugitive,
gripping his rifle, bobbed and whirled at the whim of the greedy water
as shots struck near him. Making a desperate effort, he staggered up the
bank and fell exhausted behind a bowlder.

"Well, th' coyote is afoot, anyhow," said Red, with great satisfaction.

"Yes; but how are we going to get to him?" asked Hopalong. "We can't get
th' cayuses down here, an' we can't swim _that_ water without them. And
if we could, he'd pot us easy."

"There's a way out of it somewhere," Red replied, disappearing over the
edge of the bluff to gamble with Fate.

"Hey! Come back here, you chump!" cried Hopalong, running forward.
"He'll get you, shore!"

"That's a chance I've got to take if I get him," was the reply.

A puff of smoke sailed from behind the bowlder on the other bank and
Hopalong, kneeling for steadier aim, fired and then followed his friend.
Red was downstream casting at a rock across the torrent but the wind
toyed with the heavy, water-soaked _reata_ as though it were a string.
As Hopalong reached his side a piece of driftwood ducked under the water
and an angry humming sound died away downstream. As the report reached
their ears a jet of water spurted up into Red's face and he stepped back
involuntarily.

"He's some shaky," Hopalong remarked, looking back at the wreath of
smoke above the bowlder. "I reckon I must have hit him harder than I
thought in Harlan's. Gee! he's wild as blazes!" he ejaculated as a
bullet hummed high above his head and struck sharply against the rock
wall.

"Yes," Red replied, coiling the rope. "I was trying to rope that rock
over there. If I could anchor to that, th' current would push us over
quick. But it's too far with this wind blowing."

"We can't do nothing here 'cept get plugged. He'll be getting steadier
as he rests from his fight with th' water," Hopalong remarked, and added
quickly, "Say, remember that meadow back there a ways? We can make her
from there, all right."

"Yo're right; that's what we've got to do. He's sending 'em nearer every
shot--Gee! I could 'most feel th' wind of that one. An' blamed if it
ain't stopped raining. Come on."

They clambered up the slippery, muddy bank to where they had left their
horses, and cantered back over their trail. Minute after minute passed
before the cautious skulker among the rocks across the stream could
believe in his good fortune. When he at last decided that he was alone
again he left his shelter and started away, with slowly weakening
stride, over cleanly washed rock where he left no trail.

It was late in the afternoon before the two irate punchers appeared upon
the scene, and their comments, as they hunted slowly over the hard
ground, were numerous and bitter. Deciding that it was hopeless in that
vicinity, they began casting in great circles on the chance of crossing
the trail further back from the river. But they had little faith in
their success. As Red remarked, snorting like a horse in his disgust,
"I'll bet four dollars an' a match he's swum down th' river just to have
th' laugh on us." Red had long since given it up as a bad job, though
continuing to search, when a shout from the distant Hopalong sent him
forward on a run.

"Hey, Red!" cried Hopalong, pointing ahead of them. "Look there! Ain't
that a house?"

"Naw; course not! It's a--it's a ship!" Red snorted sarcastically. "What
did you think it might be?"

"G'wan!" retorted his companion. "It's a mission."

"Ah, g'wan yorself! What's a mission doing up here?" Red snapped.

"What do you think they do? What do they do anywhere?" hotly rejoined
Hopalong, thinking about Johnny. "There! See th' cross?"

"Shore enough!"

"An' there's tracks at last--mighty wobbly, but tracks just th' same.
Them rocks couldn't go on forever. Red, I'll bet he's cashed in by this
time."

"Cashed nothing! Them fellers don't."

"Well, if he's in that joint we might as well go back home. We won't get
him, not nohow," declared Hopalong.

"Huh! You wait an' see!" replied Red, pugnaciously.

"Reckon you never run up agin' a mission real hard," Hopalong responded,
his memory harking back to the time he had disagreed with a convent, and
they both meant about the same to him as far as winning out was
concerned.

"Think I'm a fool kid?" snapped Red, aggressively.

"Well, you ain't no _kid_."

"You let _me_ do th' talking; _I'll_ get him."

"All right; an' I'll do th' laughing," snickered Hopalong, at the door.
"Sic 'em, Red!"

The other boldly stepped into a small vestibule, Hopalong close at his
heels. Red hitched his holster and walked heavily into a room at his
left. With the exception of a bench, a table, and a small altar, the
room was devoid of furnishings, and the effect of these was lost in the
dim light from the narrow windows. The peculiar, not unpleasant odor of
burning incense and the dim light awakened a latent reverence and awe in
Hopalong, and he sneaked off his sombrero, an inexplicable feeling of
guilt stealing over him. There were three doors in the walls, deeply
shrouded in the dusk of the room, and it was very hard to watch all
three at once. . . .

Red listened intently and then grinned. "Hear that? They're playing
dominoes in there--come on!"

"Aw, you chump! 'Dominee' means 'mother' in Latin, which is what they
speaks."

"How do you know?"

"Hanged if I can tell--I've heard it somewhere, that's all."

"Well, I don't care what it means. This is a frame-up so that coyote can
get away. I'll bet they gave him a cayuse an' started him off while
we've been losing time in here. I'm going inside an' ask some
questions."

Before he could put his plan into execution, Hopalong nudged him and he
turned to see his friend staring at one of the doors. There had been no
sound, but he would swear that a monk stood gravely regarding them, and
he rubbed his eyes. He stepped back suspiciously and then started
forward again.

"Look here, stranger," he remarked, with quiet emphasis, "we're after
that cow-lifter, an' we mean to get him. Savvy?"

The monk did not appear to hear him, so he tried another trick. "_Habla
espanola?_" he asked, experimentally.

"You have ridden far?" replied the monk in perfect English.

"All th' way from th' Bend," Red replied, relieved. "We're after Jerry
Brown. He tried to kill Johnny, judgin' from th' tracks."

"And if you capture him?"

"He won't have no more use for no side pocket shooting."

"I see; you will kill him."

"Shore's it's wet outside."

"I'm afraid you are doomed to disappointment."

"Ya-as?" asked Red with a rising inflection.

"You will not want him now," replied the monk.

Red laughed sarcastically and Hopalong smiled.

"There ain't a-going to be no argument about it. Trot him out," ordered
Red, grimly.

The monk turned to Hopalong. "Do you, too, want him?"

Hopalong nodded.

"My friends, he is safe from your punishment."

Red wheeled instantly and ran outside, returning in a few moments,
smiling triumphantly. "There are tracks coming in, but there ain't none
going away. He's here. If you don't lead us to him we'll shore have to
rummage around an' poke him out for ourselves: which is it?"

"You are right--he is here, and he is not here."

"We're waiting," Red replied, grinning.

"When I tell you that you will not want him, do you still insist on
seeing him?"

"We'll see him, an' we'll want him, too."

As the rain poured down again the sound of approaching horses was heard,
and Hopalong ran to the door in time to see Buck Peters swing off his
mount and step forward to enter the building. Hopalong stopped him and
briefly outlined the situation, begging him to keep the men outside. The
monk met his return with a grateful smile and, stepping forward, opened
the chapel door, saying, "Follow me."

The unpretentious chapel was small and nearly dark, for the usual
dimness was increased by the lowering clouds outside. The deep, narrow
window openings, fitted with stained glass, ran almost to the rough-hewn
rafters supporting the steep-pitched roof, upon which the heavy rain
beat again with a sound like that of distant drums. Gusts of rain and
the water from the roof beat against the south windows, while the
wailing wind played its mournful cadences about the eaves, and the
stanch timbers added their creaking notes to swell the dirgelike chorus.

At the farther end of the room two figures knelt and moved before the
white altar, the soft light of flickering candles playing fitfully upon
them and glinting from the altar ornaments, while before a rough coffin,
which rested upon two pedestals, stood a third, whose rich, sonorous
Latin filled the chapel with impressive sadness. "Give eternal rest to
them, O Lord,"--the words seeming to become a part of the room. The
ineffably sad, haunting melody of the mass whispered back from the roof
between the assaults of the enraged wind, while from the altar came the
responses in a low Gregorian chant, and through it all the clinking of
the censer chains added intermittent notes. Aloft streamed the vapor of
the incense, wavering with the air currents, now lost in the deep
twilight of the sanctuary, and now faintly revealed by the glow of the
candles, perfuming the air with its aromatic odor.

As the last deep-toned words died away the celebrant moved slowly around
the coffin, swinging the censer over it and then, sprinkling the body
and making the sign of the cross above its head, solemnly withdrew.

From the shadows along the side walls other figures silently emerged and
grouped around the coffin. Raising it they turned it slowly around and
carried it down the dim aisle in measured tread, moving silently as
ghosts.

"He is with God, Who will punish according to his sins," said a low
voice, and Hopalong started, for he had forgotten the presence of the
guide. "God be with you, and may you die as he died--repentant and in
peace."

Buck chafed impatiently before the chapel door leading to a small,
well-kept graveyard, wondering what it was that kept quiet for so long a
time his two most assertive men, when he had momentarily expected to
hear more or less turmoil and confusion.

_C-r-e-a-k!_ He glanced up, gun in hand and raised as the door swung
slowly open. His hand dropped suddenly and he took a short step forward;
six black-robed figures shouldering a long box stepped slowly past him,
and his nostrils were assailed by the pungent odor of the incense.
Behind them came his fighting punchers, humble, awed, reverent, their
sombreros in their hands, and their heads bowed.

"What in blazes!" exclaimed Buck, wonder and surprise struggling for the
mastery as the others cantered up.

"He's cashed," Red replied, putting on his sombrero and nodding toward
the procession.

Buck turned like a flash and spoke sharply: "Skinny! Lanky! Follow that
glory-outfit, an' see what's in that box!"

Billy Williams grinned at Red. "Yo're shore pious, Red."

"Shut up!" snapped Red, anger glinting in his eyes, and Billy subsided.

Lanky and Skinny soon returned from accompanying the procession.

"I had to look twict to be shore it was him. His face was plumb happy,
like a baby. But he's gone, all right," Lanky reported.

"All right--he knowed how he'd finish when he began. Now for that dear
Mr. Harlan," Buck replied, vaulting into the saddle. He turned and
looked at Hopalong, and his wonder grew. "Hey, _you!_ Yes, _you!_ Come
out of that an' put on yore lid! Straddle leather--we can't stay here
all night."

Hopalong started, looked at his sombrero and silently obeyed. As they
rode down the trail and around a corner he turned in his saddle and
looked back; and then rode on, buried in thought.

Billy, grinning, turned and playfully punched him in the ribs. "Gettin'
glory, Hoppy?"

Hopalong raised his head and looked him steadily in the eyes; and Billy,
losing his curiosity and the grin at the same instant, looked ahead,
whistling softly.

FOOTNOTE:

[8] From _Bar-20 Days_. Copyright, 1911, by A. C. McClurg and Company.
Reprinted by special permission of author and publisher.




[Illustration]




IX.--Dey Ain't No Ghosts[9]

_By Ellis Parker Butler_


ONCE 'pon a time dey was a li'l black boy whut he name was Mose. An'
whin he come erlong to be 'bout knee-high to a mewel, he 'gin to git
powerful 'fraid ob ghosts, 'ca'se dey's a grabeyard in de hollow, an' a
buryin'-ground on de hill, an' a cemuntary in betwixt an' between, an'
dey ain't nuffin' but trees nowhar in de clearin' by de shanty an' down
de hollow whar de pumpkin-patch am.

An' whin de night come erlong, dey ain't no sounds at all whut kin be
heard in dat locality but de rain-doves, whut mourn out,
"Oo-_oo_-o-o-o!" jes dat trembulous an' scary, an' de owls, whut mourn
out, "Whut-_whoo_-o-o-o!" more trembulous an' scary dan dat, an' de
wind, whut mourn out, "You-_you_-o-o-o!" mos' scandalous, trembulous an'
scary ob all. Dat a powerful onpleasant locality for a li'l black boy
whut he name was Mose.

'Ca'se dat li'l black boy he so specially black he can't be seen in de
dark _at_ all 'cept by de whites ob he eyes. So whin he go outen de
house at night, he ain't dast shut he eyes, 'ca'se den ain't nobody can
see him in de least. He jest as invidsible as nuffin'! An' who know but
whut a great, big ghost bump right into him 'ca'se it can't see him? An'
dat shore w'u'd scare dat li'l black boy powerful bad, 'ca'se yever'body
knows whut a cold, damp pussonality a ghost is.

So whin dat li'l black Mose go' outen de shanty at night, he keep he
eyes wide open, you may be shore. By day he eyes 'bout de size ob
butter-pats, an' come sundown he eyes 'bout de size ob saucers; but whin
he go outer de shanty at night, he eyes am de size ob de white chiny
plate whut set on de mantel; an' it powerful hard to keep eyes whut am
de size ob dat from a-winkin' an' a-blinkin'.

So whin Hallowe'en come erlong, dat li'l black Mose he jes mek up he
mind he ain't gwine outen de shack at all. He cogitate he gwine stay
right snug in de shack wid he pa an' he ma, 'ca'se de rain-doves tek
notice dat de ghosts are philanderin' roun' de country, 'ca'se dey
mourn out, "Oo-_oo_-o-o-o!" an' de owls dey mourn out, "You-_you_-o-o-o!"
De eyes ob dat li'l black Mose dey as big as de white chiny plate whut
set on de mantel by side de clock, an' de sun jes a-settin'!

So dat all right. Li'l black Mose he scrooge back in de corner by de
fireplace, an' he 'low he gwine stay dere till he gwine _to_ bed. But
bimeby Sally Ann, whut live up de road, draps in, an' Mistah Sally Ann,
whut is her husban', he draps in an' Zack Badget an' de school-teacher
whut board at Unc' Silas Diggs's house drap in, an' a powerful lot ob
folks drap in. An' li'l black Mose he seen dat gwine be one s'prise
party, an' he right down cheerful 'bout dat.

So all dem folks shake dere hands an' 'low "Howdy," an' some ob dem say:
"Why, dere's li'l Mose! Howdy, li'l Mose?" An' he so please he jes grin
an' grin, 'ca'se he ain't reckon whut gwine happen. So bimeby Sally Ann,
whut live up de road, she say, "Ain't no sort o' Hallowe'en lest we got
a jack-o'-lantern." An' de school-teacher, whut board at Unc' Silas
Diggs's house, she 'low, "Hallowe'en jes no Hallowe'en _at_ all 'thout
we got a jack-o'-lantern." An' li'l black Mose he stop a-grinnin', an'
he scrooge so far back in de corner he 'most scrooge frough de wall. But
dat ain't no use, 'ca'se he ma say, "Mose, go on down to de
pumpkin-patch an' fotch a pumpkin."

"I ain't want to go," say li'l black Mose.

"Go on erlong wid yo'," say he ma, right commandin'.

"I ain't want to go," say Mose ag'in.

"Why ain't yo' want to go?" he ma ask.

"'Ca'se I's afraid ob de ghosts," say li'l black Mose, an' dat de
particular truth an' no mistake.

"Dey ain't no ghosts," say de school-teacher, whut board at Unc' Silas
Diggs's house, right peart.

"'Co'se dey ain't no ghosts," say Zack Badget, whut dat 'feared ob
ghosts he ain't dar' come to li'l black Mose's house ef de
school-teacher ain't ercompany him.

"Go 'long wid your ghosts!" say li'l black Mose's ma.

"Wha' yo' pick up dat nonsense?" say he pa. "Dey ain't no ghosts."

An' dat whut all dat s'prise-party 'lows: dey ain't no ghosts. An' dey
'low dey mus' hab a jack-o'-lantern or de fun all spiled. So dat li'l
black boy whut he name is Mose he done got to fotch a pumpkin from de
pumpkin-patch down de hollow. So he step outen de shanty an' he stan' on
de doorstep twell he get he eyes pried open as big as de bottom ob he
ma's washtub, mostly, an' he say, "Dey ain't no ghosts." An' he put one
foot on de ground, an' dat was de fust step.

An' de rain-dove say, "Oo-_oo_-o-o-o!"

An' li'l black Mose he tuck anudder step.

An' de owl mourn out, "Whut-_whoo_-o-o-o!"

An' li'l black Mose he tuck anudder step.

An' de wind sob out, "You-_you_-o-o-o!"

An' li'l black Mose he tuck one look ober he shoulder an' he shut he
eyes so tight dey hurt round de aidges, an' he pick up he foots an' run.
Yas, sah, he run right peart fast. An' he say: "Dey ain't no ghosts. Dey
ain't no ghosts." An' he run erlong de paff whut lead by de
buryin'-ground on de hill, 'ca'se dey ain't no fince eround dat
buryin'-ground at all.

No fince; jes de big trees whut de owls an' de rain-doves sot in an'
mourn an' sob, an' whut de wind sigh an' cry frough. An' bimeby somefin'
jes _brush_ li'l Mose on de arm, which mek him run jest a bit more
faster. An' bimeby somefin' jes _brush_ li'l Mose on de cheek, which mek
him run erbout as fast as he can. An' bimeby somefin' _grab_ li'l Mose
by de aidge of he coat, an' he fight an' struggle an' cry out: "Dey
ain't no ghosts. Dey ain't no ghosts." An' dat ain't nuffin' but de wild
brier whut grab him, an' dat ain't nuffin' but de leaf ob a tree whut
brush he cheek, an' dat ain't nuffin' but de branch ob a hazel-bush whut
brush he arm. But he downright scared jes de same, an' he ain't lost no
time, 'ca'se de wind an' de owls an' de rain-doves dey signerfy whut
ain't no good. So he scoot past dat buryin'-ground whut on de hill, an'
dat cemuntary whut betwixt an' between, an' dat grabeyard in de hollow,
twell he come to de pumpkin-patch, an' he rotch down an' tek erhold ob
de bestest pumpkin whut in de patch. An' he right smart scared. He jes
de mostest scared li'l black boy whut yever was. He ain't gwine open he
eyes fo' nuffin', 'ca'se de wind go, "You-_you_-o-o-o!" an' de owls go,
"Whut-_whoo_-o-o-o!" an' de rain-doves go, "Oo-_oo_-o-o-o!"

He jes speculate, "Dey ain't no ghosts," an' wish he hair don't stand on
ind dat way. An' he jes cogitate, "Dey ain't no ghosts," an' wish he
goose-pimples don't rise up dat way. An' he jes 'low, "Dey ain't no
ghosts," an' wish he backbone ain't all trembulous wid chills dat way.
So he rotch down, an' he rotch down, twell he git a good hold on dat
pricklesome stem of dat bestest pumpkin whut in de patch, an' he jes
yank dat stem wid all he might.

"_Let loosen my head!_" say a big voice all on a suddent.

Dat li'l black boy whut he name is Mose he jump 'most outen he skin. He
open he eyes an' he 'gin to shake like de aspen tree, 'ca'se whut dat
a-standin' right dar behind him but a 'mendjous big ghost! Yas, sah, dat
de bigges', whites' ghost whut yever was. An' it ain't got no head.
Ain't go no head _at_ all. Li'l black Mose he jest drap on he knees an'
he beg an' pray:

"Oh, 'scuse me! 'Scuse me, Mistah Ghost!" he beg. "Ah ain't mean no harm
at all."

"Whut for you try to take my head?" as' de ghost in dat fearsome voice
whut like de damp wind outen de cellar.

"'Scuse me! 'Scuse me!" beg li'l Mose. "Ah ain't know dat was yo' head,
an' I ain't know you was dar _at_ all. 'Scuse me!"

"Ah 'scuse you ef you do me dis favor," say de ghost. "Ah got somefin'
powerful _im_portant to say unto you, an' Ah can't say hit 'ca'se Ah
ain't got no head; an' whin Ah ain't got no head, Ah ain't got no mouf,
an' whin Ah ain't got no mouf, Ah can't talk _at_ all."

An' dat right logical fo' shore. Can't nobody talk whin he ain't got no
mouf, an' can't nobody have no mouf whin he ain't got no head, an' whin
li'l black Mose he look, he see dat ghost ain't go no head _at_ all.
Nary head.

So de ghost say:

"Ah come on down yere fo' to git a pumpkin fo' a head, an' Ah pick dat
ixact pumpkin whut yo' gwine tek, an' Ah don't like dat one bit. No,
sah. Ah feel like Ah pick yo' up an' carry yo' away, an' nobody see you
no more for yever. But Ah got somefin' powerful _im_portant to say unto
yo', an' if yo' pick up dat pumpkin an' sot it on de place whar my head
ought to be, Ah let you off dis time, 'ca'se Ah ain't been able to talk
fo' so long Ah'm right hongry to say somefin'!"

So li'l black Mose he heft up dat pumpkin, an' de ghost he bent down,
an' li'l black Mose he sot dat pumpkin on dat ghostses neck. An' right
off dat pumpkin head 'gin to wink an' blink like a jack-o'-lantern, an'
right off dat pumpkin head 'gin to glimmer an' glow frough de mouf like
a jack-o'-lantern, an' right off dat ghost start to speak. Yas, sah,
dass so.

"Whut yo' want to say unto me?" _in_quire li'l black Mose.

"Ah want to tell yo'," say de ghost, "dat yo' ain't need yever be
skeered of ghosts, 'ca'se dey ain't no ghosts."

An' whin he say dat de ghost jes vanish away like de smoke in July. He
ain't even linger round dat locality like de smoke in Yoctober. He jes
dissipate outen de air, an' he gone _in_tirely.

So li'l Mose he grab up de nex' bestest pumpkin an' he scoot. An' whin
he come to de grabeyard in de hollow, he goin' erlong same as yever,
on'y faster, whin he reckon, he'll pick up a club _in_ case he gwine
have trouble. An' he rotch down an' rotch down, an' tek hold of a lively
appearin' hunk o' wood whut right dar. An' whin he grab dat hunk of
wood. . . .

"_Let loosen my leg!_" say a big voice all on a suddent.

Dat li'l black boy 'most jump outen he skin, 'ca'se right dar in de paff
is six 'mendjus big ghosts, an' de bigges' ain't got but one leg. So
li'l black Mose jes natchully handed dat hunk of wood to dat bigges'
ghost, an' he say:

"'Scuse me, Mistah Ghost; Ah ain't know dis your leg."

An' whut dem six ghostes do but stand round an' confabulate? Yas, sah,
dass so. An' whin dey do so, one say:

"'Pears like dis a mighty likely li'l black boy. Whut we gwine do fo' to
_re_ward him fo' politeness?"

"Tell him whut de truth is 'bout ghosts."

So de bigges' ghost he say:

"Ah gwine tell yo' somethin' important whut yever'body don't know: Dey
_ain't_ no ghosts."

An' whin he say dat, de ghosts jes natchully vanish away, an' li'l black
Mose he proceed up de paff. He so scared he hair jes yank at de roots,
an' when de wind go "Oo-_oo_-oo-o-o," an' de owl go, "Whut-_whoo_-o-o-o!"
an' de rain-doves go, "You-_you_-o-o-o!" he jes tremble an' shake. An'
bimeby he come to de cemuntary whut betwixt an' between, an' he shore is
mighty skeered, 'ca'se dey is a whole comp'ny of ghostes lined up along
de road, an' he 'low he ain't gwine spind no more time palaverin' wid
ghostes. So he step offen de road fo' to go round erbout, an' he step on
a pine-stump whut lay right dar.

"_Git offen my chest!_" say a big voice all on a suddent, 'ca'se dat
stump am been selected by de captain ob de ghostes for to be he chest,
'ca'se he ain't got no chest betwixt he shoulders an' he legs. An' li'l
black Mose he hop offen dat stump right peart. Yes, _sah;_ right peart.

"'Scuse me! 'Scuse me!" dat li'l black Mose beg an' pleed, an' de
ghostes ain't know whuther to eat him all up or not, 'ca'se he step on
de boss ghostes's chest dat a-way. But bimeby they 'low they let him go
'ca'se dat was an accident, an' de captain ghost he say, "Mose, you
Mose, Ah gwine let you off dis time, 'ca'se you ain't nuffin' but a
misabul li'l tremblin' nigger; but Ah want you should remimber one
thing mos' particular'."

"Ya-yas, sah," say dat li'l black boy; "Ah'll remimber. What is dat Ah
got to remimber?"

De captain ghost he swell up, an' he swell up, twell he as big as a
house, an' he say in a voice whut shake de ground:

"Dey ain't no ghosts."

So li'l black Mose he bound to remimber dat, an' he rise up an' mek a
bow, an' he proceed toward home right libely. He do, indeed.

An' he gwine along jes as fast as he kin whin he come to de aidge ob de
buryin'-ground whut on de hill, an' right dar he bound to stop, 'ca'se
de kentry round about am so populate he ain't able to go frough. Yas,
sah, seem like all de ghostes in de world havin' de conferince right
dar. Seem like all de ghosteses whut yever was am havin' a convintion on
dat spot. An' dat li'l black Mose so skeered he jes fall down on e' old
log whut dar an' screech an' moan! An' all on a suddent de log up and
spoke to li'l Mose:

"_Get offen me! Get offen me!_" yell dat log.

So li'l black Mose he git offen dat log, an' no mistake.

An' soon as he git offen de log, de log uprise, an' li'l black Mose he
see dat dat log am de king ob all de ghostes. An' whin de king uprise,
all de congregation crowd round li'l black Mose, an' dey am about leben
millium an' a few lift over. Yes, sah; dat de reg'lar annyul Hallowe'en
convintion whut li'l black Mose interrup. Right dar am all de sperits in
de world, an' all de ha'nts in de world, an' all de hobgoblins in de
world, an' all de ghouls in de world, an' all de spicters in de world,
an' all de ghostes in de world. An' whin dey see li'l black Mose, dey
all gnash dey teef an' grin 'ca'se it gettin' erlong toward dey-all's
lunchtime. So de king, whut he name old Skull-an'-Bones, he step on top
ob li'l Mose's head, an' he say:

"Gin'l'min, de convintion will come to order. De sicretary please note
who is prisint. De firs' business whut come before de convintion am:
whut we gwine do to a li'l black boy whut stip on de king an' maul all
ober de king an' treat de king dat disdespictful."

An' li'l black Mose jes moan an' sob:

"'Scuse me! 'Scuse me, Mistah King! Ah ain't mean no harm _at_ all."

But nobody ain't pay no attintion to him at all, 'ca'se yevery one
lookin' at a monstrous big ha'nt whut name Bloody Bones, whut rose up
an' spoke.

"Your Honor, Mistah King, an' gin'l'min _an'_ ladies," he say, "dis am a
right bad case ob _lazy majesty_, 'ca'se de king been step on. Whin
yevery li'l black boy whut choose gwine wander round at night an' stip
on de king of ghostes, it ain't no time for to palaver, it ain't no time
for to prevaricate, it ain't no time for to cogitate, it ain't no time
do nuffin' but tell de truth, an' de whole truth, an' nuffin but de
truth."

An' all dem ghostes sicond de motion, an' dey canfabulate out loud
erbout it, an' de noise soun like de rain-doves goin', "Oo-_oo_-o-o-o!"
an' de owls goin', "Whut-_whoo_-o-o-o!" an' de wind goin',
"You-_you_-o-o-o!" So dat risolution am passed unanermous, an' no
mistake.

So de king ob de ghosts, whut name old Skull-an'-Bones, he place he hand
on de head ob li'l black Mose, an' he hand feel like a wet rag, an' he
say:

"Dey ain't no ghosts."

An' one ob de hairs whut on de head ob li'l black Mose turn white.

An' de monstrous big ha'nt whut he name Bloody Bones he lay he hand on
de head ob li'l black Mose, and he hand feel like a toadstool in de cool
ob de day, an' he say:

"Dey ain't no ghosts."

An' anudder ob de hairs whut on de head ob li'l black Mose turn white.

An' a heejus sperit whut he name Moldy Pa'm place he hand on de head ob
li'l black Mose, an' he hand feel like ye yunner side ob a lizard, an'
he say:

"Dey ain't no ghosts."

An' anudder ob de hairs whut on de head ob li'l black Mose turn white
_as_ snow.

An' a perticklar bent-up hobgoblin he put hand on de head ob li'l black
Mose, an' he mek dat same _re_mark, and dat whole convintion ob ghostes
an' spicters an' ha'nts an' yever-thing, which am more 'n a millium,
pass by so quick dey-all's hands feel lak de wind whut blow outen de
cellar whin de day am hot, an' dey-all say, "Dey ain't no ghosts." Yas,
sah, dey-all say dem wo'ds so fas' it soun like de wind whin it moan
frough de turkentine-trees whut behind de cider-priss. An' yevery hair
whut on li'l black Mose's head turn white. Dat whut happen whin a li'l
black boy gwine meet a ghost convintion dat a-way. Dat's so he ain't
gwine fergit to remimber dey ain't no ghosts. 'Ca'se ef a li'l black boy
gwine imaginate dey _is_ ghostes, he gwine be skeered in de dark. An'
dat a foolish thing for to imaginate.

So prisintly all de ghostes am whiff away, like de fog outen de holler
whin de wind blow' on it, an' li'l black Mose he ain' see 'ca'se for to
remain in dat locality no longer. He rotch down, an' he raise up de
pumpkin, an' he perambulate right quick to he ma's shack, an' he lift up
de latch, an' he open de do', an' he yenter in. An' he say:

"Yere's de pumpkin."

An' he ma an' he pa, an' Sally Ann, whut live up de road, an' Mistah
Sally Ann, whut her husban', an' Zack Badget, an' de school-teacher whut
board at Unc' Silas Diggs's house, an' all de powerful lot of folks whut
come to de doin's, dey all scrooged back in de cornder ob de shack,
'ca'se Zack Badget he been done tell a ghost-tale, an' de rain-doves
gwine "Ooo-_oo_-o-o-o!" an' de owls am gwine, "Whut-_whoo_-o-o-o!" and
de wind it gwine, "You-_you_-o-o-o!" an' yever'body powerful skeered.
'Ca'se li'l black Mose he come a-fumblin' an' a-rattlin' at de do' jes
whin dat ghost-tale mos' skeery, an' yever'body gwine imaginate dat de
ghost a-fumblin' an' a-rattlin' at de do'. Yas, sah. So li'l black Mose
he turn he white head, an' he look roun' an' peer roun', an' he say:

"Whut you all skeered fo'?"

'Ca'se ef anybody skeered, he want to be skeered, too. Dat's natural.
But de school-teacher, whut live at Unc' Silas Diggs's house, she say:

"Fo' de lan's sake, we fought you was a ghost!"

So li'l black Mose he sort ob sniff an' he sort ob sneer, an' he 'low:

"Huh! dey ain't no ghosts."

Den he ma she powerful took back dat li'l black Mose he gwine be so
upotish an' contrydict folks whut know 'rifmeticks an' algebricks an'
gin'ral countin' widout fingers, like de school-teacher whut board at
Unc' Silas Diggs's house knows, an' she say:

"Huh; whut you know 'bout ghosts, anner way?"

An' li'l black Mose he jes kinder stan' on one foot, an' he jes kinder
suck he thumb, an' he jes kinder 'low:

"I don' know nuffin' erbout ghosts, 'ca'se dey ain't no ghosts."

So he pa gwine whop him fo' tellin' a fib 'bout dey ain't no ghosts whin
yever'body know dey is ghosts; but de school-teacher, whut board at Unc'
Silas Diggs's house, she tek note de hair ob li'l black Mose's head am
plumb white, an' she tek note li'l black Mose's face am de color of
wood-ash, so she jes retch one arm round dat li'l black boy, an' she jes
snuggle him up, an' she say:

"Honey lamb, don't you be skeered; ain' nobody gwine hurt you. How you
know dey ain't no ghosts?"

An' li'l black Mose he kinder lean up 'g'inst de school-teacher whut
board at Unc' Silas Diggs's house, an' he 'low:

"'Ca'se--'ca'se--'ca'se I met de cap'n ghost, an' I met de gin'ral
ghost, an' I met de king ghost, an' I met all de ghostes whut yever was
in de whole worl', an' yevery ghost say de same thing: 'Dey ain't no
ghosts.' An' if de cap'n ghost an' de gin'ral ghost an' de king ghost
an' all de ghostes in de whole worl' don' know ef dar am ghostes, who
does?"

"Das right; das right, honey lamb," say de school-teacher. An' she say:
"I been s'picious dey ain' no ghostes dis long whiles, an' now I know.
Ef all de ghostes say dey ain' no ghosts, dey _ain'_ no ghosts."

So yever'body 'low dat o cep' Zack Badget, whut been tellin' de
ghost-tale, an' he ain' gwine say "Yis" an' he ain' gwine say "No,"
'ca'se he right sweet on de school-teacher; but he know right well he
done seen plinty ghostes in he day. So he boun' to be sure fust. So he
say to li'l black Mose:

"'Tain' likely you met up wid a monstrous big ha'nt whut live down de
lane whut he name Bloody Bones?"

"Yas," say li'l black Mose, "I done met up wid him."

"An' did old Bloody Bones done tol' you dey ain' no ghosts?" say Zack
Badget.

"Yas," say li'l black Mose, "he done tell me perzactly dat."

"Well, if _he_ tol' you dey ain' no ghosts," say Zack Badget, "I got to
'low dey ain't no ghosts, 'ca'se he ain't gwine tell no lie erbout it. I
know dat Bloody Bones ghost sence I was a piccaninny, an' I done met up
wif him a powerful lot o' times, an' he ain't gwine tell no lie erbout
it. Ef dat perticklar ghost say dey ain't no ghosts, dey ain't no
ghosts."

So yever'body say:

"Das right; dey ain't no ghosts."

An' dat mek li'l black Mose feel mighty good, 'ca'se he ain' lek
ghostes. He reckon he gwine be a heap mo' comfortable in he mind sence
he know dey ain't no ghosts, an' he reckon he ain' gwine be skeered of
nuffin' never no more. He ain't gwine min' de dark, an' he ain't gwine
min' de rain-doves whut go, "Ooo-_oo_-o-o-o!" an' he ain' gwine min' de
owls whut go, "Who-_who_-o-o-o!" an' he ain' gwine min' de wind whut go,
"You-_you_-o-o-o!" nor nuffin, nohow. He gwine be brave as a lion, sence
he know fo' sure dey ain' no ghosts. So prisintly he ma say:

"Well, time fo' a li'l black boy whut he name is Mose to be gwine up de
ladder to de loft to bed."

An' li'l black Mose he 'low he gwine wait a bit. He 'low he gwine jes
wait a li'l bit. He 'low he gwine be no trouble _at_ all ef he jes been
let wait twell he ma she gwine up de ladder to de loft to bed, too. So
he ma she say:

"Git erlong wid yo'! Whut you skeered ob whin dey ain't no ghosts?"

An' li'l black Mose he scrooge, an' he twist, an' he pucker up he mouf,
an' he rub he eyes, an' prisintly he say right low:

"I ain't skeered ob ghosts whut am, 'ca'se dey ain't no ghosts."

"Den what am yo' skeered ob?" ask he ma.

"Nuffin'," say de li'l black boy whut he name is Mose; "but I jes feel
kinder oneasy 'bout de ghosts whut ain't."

Jes lak white folks! Jes lak white folks!

FOOTNOTE:

[9] Copyright, 1913, by the Century Company. Reprinted by special
permission of the author.




[Illustration]




X.--The Night Operator[10]

_By Frank L. Packard_


TODDLES, in the beginning, wasn't exactly a railroad man--for several
reasons. First he wasn't a man at all; second, he wasn't, strictly
speaking, on the company's pay roll; third, which is apparently
irrelevant, everybody said he was a bad one; and fourth--because Hawkeye
nicknamed him Toddles.

Toddles had another name--Christopher Hyslop Hoogan--but Big Cloud never
lay awake at nights losing any sleep over that. On the first run that
Christopher Hyslop Hoogan ever made, Hawkeye looked him over for a
minute, said, "Toddles," shortlike--and, shortlike, that settled the
matter so far as the Hill Division was concerned. His name was Toddles.

Piecemeal, Toddles wouldn't convey anything to you to speak of. You'd
have to see Toddles coming down the aisle of a car to get him at
all--and then the chances are you'd turn around after he'd gone by and
stare at him, and it would be even money that you'd call him back and
fish for a dime to buy something by way of excuse. Toddles got a good
deal of business that way. Toddles had a uniform and a regular run all
right, but he wasn't what he passionately longed to be--a legitimate,
dyed-in-the-wool railroader. His pay check, plus commissions, came from
the News Company down East that had the railroad concession. Toddles was
a newsboy. In his blue uniform and silver buttons, Toddles used to stack
up about the height of the back of the car seats as he hawked his wares
along the aisles; and the only thing that was big about him was his
head, which looked as though it had got a whopping big lead on his
body--and didn't intend to let the body cut the lead down any. This
meant a big cap, and, as Toddles used to tilt the vizor forward, the tip
of his nose, bar his mouth which was generous, was about all one got of
his face. Cap, buttons, magazines and peanuts, that was Toddles--all
except his voice. Toddles had a voice that would make you jump if you
were nervous the minute he opened the car door, and if you weren't
nervous you would be before he had reached the other end of the
aisle--it began low down somewhere on high G and went through you shrill
as an east wind, and ended like the shriek of a brake-shoe with
everything the Westinghouse equipment had to offer cutting loose on a
quick stop.

Hawkeye? That was what Toddles called his beady-eyed conductor in
retaliation. Hawkeye used to nag Toddles every chance he got, and, being
Toddles' conductor, Hawkeye got a good many chances. In a word, Hawkeye,
carrying the punch on the local passenger, that happened to be the run
Toddles was given when the News Company sent him out from the East, used
to think he got a good deal of fun out of Toddles--only his idea of fun
and Toddles' idea of fun were as divergent as the poles, that was all.

Toddles, however, wasn't anybody's fool, not by several degrees--not
even Hawkeye's. Toddles hated Hawkeye like poison; and his hate, apart
from daily annoyances, was deep-seated. It was Hawkeye who had dubbed
him "Toddles." And Toddles repudiated the name with his heart, his
soul--and his fists.

Toddles wasn't anybody's fool, whatever the division thought, and he was
right down to the basic root of things from the start. Coupled with the
stunted growth that nature in a miserly mood had doled out to him, none
knew better than himself that the name of "Toddles," keeping that nature
stuff patently before everybody's eyes, damned him in his aspirations
for a bona fide railroad career. Other boys got a job and got their feet
on the ladder as call-boys, or in the roundhouse; Toddles got--a grin.
Toddles pestered everybody for a job. He pestered Carleton, the super.
He pestered Tommy Regan, the master mechanic. Every time that he saw
anybody in authority Toddles spoke up for a job, he was in deadly
earnest--and got a grin. Toddles with a basket of unripe fruit and stale
chocolates and his "best-seller" voice was one thing; but Toddles as
anything else was just--Toddles.

Toddles repudiated the name, and did it forcefully. Not that he couldn't
take his share of a bit of guying, but because he felt that he was face
to face with a vital factor in the career he longed for--so he fought.
And if nature had been niggardly in one respect, she had been generous
in others; Toddles, for all his size, possessed the heart of a lion and
the strength of a young ox, and he used both, with black and bloody
effect, on the eyes and noses of the call-boys and younger element who
called him Toddles. He fought it all along the line--at the drop of the
hat--at a whisper of "Toddles." There wasn't a day went by that Toddles
wasn't in a row; and the women, the mothers of the defeated warriors
whose eyes were puffed and whose noses trickled crimson, denounced him
in virulent language over their washtubs and the back fences of Big
Cloud. You see, they didn't understand him, so they called him a "bad
one," and, being from the East and not one of themselves, "a New York
gutter snipe."

But, for all that, the name stuck. Up and down through the Rockies it
was--Toddles. Toddles, with the idea of getting a lay-over on a siding,
even went to the extent of signing himself in full--Christopher Hyslop
Hoogan--every time his signature was in order; but the official
documents in which he was concerned, being of a private nature between
himself and the News Company, did not, in the very nature of things,
have much effect on the Hill Division. Certainly the big fellows never
knew he had any name but Toddles--and cared less. But they knew him as
Toddles, all right! All of them did, every last one of them! Toddles was
everlastingly and eternally bothering them for a job. Any kind of a job,
no matter what, just so it was real railroading, and so a fellow could
line up with everybody else when the pay car came along, and look
forward to being something some day.

Toddles, with time, of course, grew older, up to about seventeen or so,
but he didn't grow any bigger--not enough to make it noticeable! Even
Toddles' voice wouldn't break--it was his young heart that did all the
breaking there was done. Not that he ever showed it. No one ever saw a
tear in the boy's eyes. It was clenched fists for Toddles, clenched
fists and passionate attack. And therein, while Toddles had grasped the
basic truth that his nickname militated against his ambitions, he erred
in another direction that was equally fundamental, if not more so.

And here, it was Bob Donkin, the night dispatcher, as white a man as his
record after years of train-handling was white, a railroad man from the
ground up if there ever was one, and one of the best, who set
Toddles--but we'll come to that presently. We've got our "clearance"
now, and we're off with "rights" through.

No. 83, Hawkeye's train--and Toddles'--scheduled Big Cloud on the
eastbound run at 9.05; and, on the night the story opens, they were
about an hour away from the little mountain town that was the divisional
point, as Toddles, his basket of edibles in the crook of his arm, halted
in the forward end of the second-class smoker to examine again the
fistful of change that he dug out of his pants pocket with his free
hand.

Toddles was in an unusually bad humor, and he scowled. With exceeding
deftness he separated one of the coins from the others, using his
fingers like the teeth of a rake, and dropped the rest back jingling
into his pocket. The coin that remained he put into his mouth, and bit
on it--hard. His scowl deepened. Somebody had presented Toddles with a
lead quarter.

It wasn't so much the quarter, though Toddles' salary wasn't so big as
some people's who would have felt worse over it, it was his _amour
propre_ that was touched--deeply. It wasn't often that any one could put
so bald a thing as lead money across on Toddles. Toddles' mind harked
back along the aisles of the cars behind him. He had only made two sales
that round, and he had changed a quarter each time--for the pretty girl
with the big picture hat, who had giggled at him when she bought a
package of chewing gum; and the man with the three-carat diamond tie-pin
in the parlor car, a little more than on the edge of inebriety, who had
got on at the last stop, and who had bought a cigar from him.

Toddles thought it over for a bit; decided he wouldn't have a fuss with
a girl anyway, balked at a parlor car fracas with a drunk, dropped the
coin back into his pocket, and went on into the combination baggage and
express car. Here, just inside the door, was Toddles', or, rather, the
News Company's chest. Toddles lifted the lid; and then his eyes shifted
slowly and traveled up the car. Things were certainly going badly with
Toddles that night.

There were four men in the car: Bob Donkin, coming back from a holiday
trip somewhere up the line; MacNicoll, the baggage-master; Nulty, the
express messenger--and Hawkeye. Toddles' inventory of the contents of
the chest had been hurried--but intimate. A small bunch of six bananas
was gone, and Hawkeye was munching them unconcernedly. It wasn't the
first time the big, hulking, six-foot conductor had pilfered the boy's
chest, not by many--and never paid for the pilfering. That was Hawkeye's
idea of a joke.

Hawkeye was talking to Nulty, elaborately simulating ignorance of
Toddles' presence--and he was talking about Toddles.

"Sure," said Hawkeye, his mouth full of banana, "he'll be a great
railroad man some day! He's the stuff they're made of! You can see it
sticking out all over him! He's only selling peanuts now till he grows
up and----"

Toddles put down his basket and planted himself before the conductor.

"You pay for those bananas," said Toddles in a low voice--which was
high.

"When'll he grow up?" continued Hawkeye, peeling more fruit. "I don't
know--you've got me. The first time I saw him two years ago, I'm hanged
if he wasn't bigger than he is now--guess he grows backwards. Have a
banana?" He offered one to Nulty, who refused it.

"You pay for those bananas, you big stiff!" squealed Toddles
belligerently.

Hawkeye turned his head slowly and turned his little beady, black eyes
on Toddles, then he turned with a wink to the others, and for the first
time in two years offered payment. He fished into his pocket and handed
Toddles a twenty-dollar bill--there always was a mean streak in Hawkeye,
more or less of a bully, none too well liked, and whose name on the pay
roll, by the way, was Reynolds.

"Take fifteen cents out of that," he said, with no idea that the boy
could change the bill.

For a moment Toddles glared at the yellow-back, then a thrill of unholy
glee came to Toddles. He could just about make it, business all around
had been pretty good that day, particularly on the run west in the
morning.

Hawkeye went on with the exposition of his idea of humor at Toddles'
expense; and Toddles went back to his chest and his reserve funds.
Toddles counted out eighteen dollars in bills, made a neat pile of four
quarters--the lead one on the bottom--another neat pile of the odd
change, and returned to Hawkeye. The lead quarter wouldn't go very far
toward liquidating Hawkeye's long-standing indebtedness--but it would
help some.

Queer, isn't it--the way things happen? Think of a man's whole life,
aspirations, hopes, ambitions, everything, pivoting on--a lead quarter!
But then they say that opportunity knocks once at the door of every man;
and, if that be true, let it be remarked in passing that Toddles wasn't
deaf!

Hawkeye, making Toddles a target for a parting gibe, took up his lantern
and started through the train to pick up the fates from the last stop.
In due course he halted before the inebriated one with the glittering
tie-pin in the smoking compartment of the parlor car.

"Ticket, please," said Hawkeye.

"Too busy to buysh ticket," the man informed him, with heavy confidence.
"Whash fare Loon Dam to Big Cloud?"

"One-fifty," said Hawkeye curtly.

The man produced a roll of bills, and from the roll extracted a
two-dollar note.

Hawkeye handed him back two quarters, and started to punch a cash-fare
slip. He looked up to find the man holding out one of the quarters
insistently, if somewhat unsteadily.

"What's the matter?" demanded Hawkeye brusquely.

"Bad," said the man.

A drummer grinned; and an elderly gentleman, from his magazine, looked
up inquiringly over his spectacles.

"Bad!" Hawkeye brought his elbow sharply around to focus his lamp on the
coin; then he leaned over and rang it on the window sill--only it
wouldn't ring. It was indubitably bad. Hawkeye, however, was dealing
with a drunk--and Hawkeye always did have a mean streak in him.

"It's perfectly good," he asserted gruffly.

The man rolled an eye at the conductor that mingled a sudden shrewdness
and anger, and appealed to his fellow travelers. The verdict was against
Hawkeye, and Hawkeye ungraciously pocketed the lead piece and handed
over another quarter.

"Shay," observed the inebriated one insolently, "shay, conductor, I
don't like you. You thought I was--hic!--s'drunk I wouldn't know--eh?
Thash where you fooled yerself!"

"What do you mean?" Hawkeye bridled virtuously for the benefit of the
drummer and the old gentleman with the spectacles.

And then the other began to laugh immoderately.

"Same ol' quarter," said he. "Same--hic!--ol' quarter back again. Great
system--peanut boy--conductor--hic! Pass it off on one--other passes it
off on some one else. Just passed it off on--hic!--peanut boy for a
joke. Goin' to give him a dollar when he comes back."

"Oh, you did, did you!" snapped Hawkeye ominously. "And you mean to
insinuate that I deliberately tried to----"

"Sure!" declared the man heartily.

"You're a liar!" announced Hawkeye, spluttering mad. "And what's more,
since it came from you, you'll take it back!" He dug into his pocket for
the ubiquitous lead piece.

"Not--hic!--on your life!" said the man earnestly. "You hang on to it,
old top. I didn't pass it off on _you_."

"Haw!" exploded the drummer suddenly. "Haw--haw, haw!"

And the elderly gentleman smiled.

Hawkeye's face went red, and then purple.

"Go 'way!" said the man petulantly. "I don't like you. Go 'way! Go an'
tell peanuts I--hic!--got a dollar for him."

And Hawkeye went--but Toddles never got the dollar. Hawkeye went out of
the smoking compartment of the parlor car with the lead quarter in his
pocket--because he couldn't do anything else--which didn't soothe his
feelings any--and he went out mad enough to bite himself. The drummer's
guffaw followed him, and he thought he even caught a chuckle from the
elderly party with the magazine and spectacles.

Hawkeye was mad; and he was quite well aware, painfully well aware that
he had looked like a fool, which is about one of the meanest feelings
there is to feel; and, as he made his way forward through the train, he
grew madder still. That change was the change from his twenty-dollar
bill. He had not needed to be told that the lead quarter had come from
Toddles. The only question at all in doubt was whether or not Toddles
had put the counterfeit coin over on him knowingly and with malice
aforethought. Hawkeye, however, had an intuition deep down inside of him
that there wasn't any doubt even about that, and as he opened the door
of the baggage car his intuition was vindicated. There was a grin on the
faces of Nulty, MacNicoll and Bob Donkin that disappeared with
suspicious celerity at sight of him as he came through the door.

There was no hesitation then on Hawkeye's part. Toddles, equipped for
another excursion through the train with a stack of magazines and books
that almost hid him, received a sudden and vicious clout on the side of
the ear.

"You'd try your tricks on me, would you?" Hawkeye snarled. "Lead
quarters--eh?" Another clout. "I'll teach you, you blasted little runt!"

And with the clouts, the stack of carefully balanced periodicals went
flying over the floor; and with the clouts, the nagging, and the
hectoring, and the bullying, that had rankled for close on two years in
Toddles' turbulent soul, rose in a sudden all-possessing sweep of fury.
Toddles was a fighter--with the heart of a fighter. And Toddles' cause
was just. He couldn't reach the conductor's face--so he went for
Hawkeye's legs. And the screams of rage from his high-pitched voice, as
he shot himself forward, sounded like a cageful of Australian cockatoos
on the rampage.

Toddles was small, pitifully small for his age; but he wasn't an infant
in arms--not for a minute. And in action Toddles was as near to a wild
cat as anything else that comes handy by way of illustration. Two legs
and one arm he twined and twisted around Hawkeye's legs; and the other
arm, with a hard and knotty fist on the end of it, caught the conductor
a wicked jab in the region of the bottom button of the vest. The brass
button peeled the skin off Toddles' knuckles, but the jab doubled the
conductor forward, and coincident with Hawkeye's winded grunt, the
lantern in his hand sailed ceilingwards, crashed into the center lamps
in the roof of the car, and down in a shower of tinkling glass, dripping
oil and burning wicks, came the wreckage to the floor.

There was a yell from Nulty; but Toddles hung on like grim death.
Hawkeye was bawling fluent profanity and seeing red. Toddles heard one
and sensed the other--and he clung grimly on. He was all doubled up
around Hawkeye's knees, and in that position Hawkeye couldn't get at him
very well; and, besides, Toddles had his own plan of battle. He was
waiting for an extra heavy lurch of the car.

It came. Toddles' muscles strained legs and arms and back in concert,
and for an instant across the car they tottered, Hawkeye staggering in a
desperate attempt to maintain his equilibrium--and then down--speaking
generally, on a heterogeneous pile of express parcels; concretely, with
an eloquent squnch, on a crate of eggs, thirty dozen of them, at forty
cents a dozen.

Toddles, over his rage, experienced a sickening sense of disaster, but
still he clung; he didn't dare let go. Hawkeye's fists, both in an
effort to recover himself and in an endeavor to reach Toddles, were
going like a windmill; and Hawkeye's threats were something terrifying
to listen to. And now they rolled over, and Toddles was underneath; and
then they rolled over again; and then a hand locked on Toddles' collar,
and he was yanked, terrier-fashion, to his feet.

His face white and determined, his fists doubled, Toddles waited for
Hawkeye to get up--the word "run" wasn't in Toddles' vocabulary. He
hadn't long to wait.

Hawkeye lunged up, draped in the broken crate--a sight. The road always
prided itself on the natty uniforms of its train crews, but Hawkeye
wasn't dressed in uniform then--mostly egg yolks. He made a dash for
Toddles, but he never reached the boy. Bob Donkin was between them.

"Cut it out!" said Donkin coldly, as he pushed Toddles behind him. "You
asked for it, Reynolds, and you got it. Now cut it out!"

And Hawkeye "cut it out." It was pretty generally understood that Bob
Donkin never talked much for show, and Bob Donkin was bigger than
Toddles, a whole lot bigger, as big as Hawkeye himself. Hawkeye "cut it
out."

Funny, the egg part of it? Well, perhaps. But the fire wasn't. True,
they got it out with the help of the hand extinguishers before it did
any serious damage, for Nulty had gone at it on the jump; but while it
lasted the burning oil on the car floor looked dangerous. Anyway, it was
bad enough so that they couldn't hide it when they got into Big
Cloud--and Hawkeye and Toddles went on the carpet for it the next
morning in the super's office.

Carleton, "Royal" Carleton, reached for a match, and, to keep his lips
straight, clamped them firmly on the amber mouthpiece of his brier, and
stumpy, big-paunched Tommy Regan, the master mechanic, who was sitting
in a chair by the window, reached hurriedly into his back pocket for his
chewing and looked out of the window to hide a grin, as the two came in
and ranged themselves in front of the super's desk--Hawkeye, six feet
and a hundred and ninety pounds, with Toddles trailing him, mostly cap
and buttons and no weight at all.

Carleton didn't ask many questions--he'd asked them before--of Bob
Donkin--and the dispatcher hadn't gone out of his way to invest the
conductor with any glorified halo. Carleton, always a strict
disciplinarian, said what he had to say and said it quietly; but he
meant to let the conductor have the worst of it, and he did--in a way
that was all Carleton's own. Two years' picking on a youngster didn't
appeal to Carleton, no matter who the youngster was. Before he was half
through he had the big conductor squirming. Hawkeye was looking for
something else--besides a galling and matter-of-fact impartiality that
accepted himself and Toddles as being on exactly the same plane and
level.

"There's a case of eggs," said Carleton at the end. "You can divide up
the damage between you. And I'm going to change your runs, unless you've
got some good reason to give me why I shouldn't?"

He waited for an answer.

Hawkeye, towering, sullen, his eyes resting bitterly on Regan, having
caught the master mechanic's grin, said nothing; Toddles, whose head
barely showed over the top of Carleton's desk, and the whole of him
sizing up about big enough to go into the conductor's pocket, was
equally silent--Toddles was thinking of something else.

"Very good," said Carleton suavely, as he surveyed the ridiculous
incongruity before him. "I'll change your runs, then. I can't have you
two _men_ brawling and prize-fighting every trip."

There was a sudden sound from the window, as though Regan had got some
of his blackstrap juice down the wrong way.

Hawkeye's face went black as thunder.

Carleton's face was like a sphinx.

"That'll do, then," he said. "You can go, both of you."

Hawkeye stamped out of the room and down the stairs. But Toddles stayed.

"Please, Mr. Carleton, won't you give me a job on----" Toddles stopped.

So had Regan's chuckle. Toddles, the irrepressible, was at it again--and
Toddles after a job, any kind of a job, was something that Regan's
experience had taught him to fly from without standing on the order of
his flight. Regan hurried from the room.

Toddles watched him go--kind of speculatively, kind of reproachfully.
Then he turned to Carleton.

"Please give me a job, Mr. Carleton," he pleaded. "Give me a job, won't
you?"

It was only yesterday on the platform that Toddles had waylaid the super
with the same demand--and about every day before that as far back as
Carleton could remember. It was hopelessly chronic. Anything convincing
or appealing about it had gone long ago--Toddles said it parrot-fashion
now. Carleton took refuge in severity.

"See here, young man," he said grimly, "you were brought into this
office for a reprimand and not to apply for a job! You can thank your
stars and Bob Donkin you haven't lost the one you've got. Now, get out!"

"I'd make good if you gave me one," said Toddles earnestly. "Honest, I
would, Mr. Carleton."

"Get out!" said the super, not altogether unkindly. "I'm busy."

Toddles swallowed a lump in his throat--but not until after his head was
turned and he'd started for the door so the super couldn't see it.
Toddles swallowed the lump--and got out. He hadn't expected anything
else, of course. The refusals were just as chronic as the demands. But
that didn't make each new one any easier for Toddles. It made it worse.

Toddles' heart was heavy as he stepped out into the hall, and the iron
was in his soul. He was seventeen now, and it looked as though he never
would get a chance--except to be a newsboy all his life. Toddles
swallowed another lump. He loved railroading; it was his one ambition,
his one desire. If he could ever get a chance, he'd show them! He'd show
them that he wasn't a joke, just because he was small!

Toddles turned at the head of the stairs to go down, when somebody
called his name.

"Here--Toddles! Come here!"

Toddles looked over his shoulder, hesitated, then marched in through the
open door of the dispatchers' room. Bob Donkin was alone there.

"What's your name--Toddles?" inquired Donkin, as Toddles halted before
the dispatcher's table.

Toddles froze instantly--hard. His fists doubled; there was a smile on
Donkin's face. Then his fists slowly uncurled; the smile on Donkin's
face had broadened, but there wasn't any malice in the smile.

"Christopher Hyslop Hoogan," said Toddles, unbending.

Donkin put his hand quickly to his mouth--and coughed.

"Um-m!" said he pleasantly. "Super hard on you this morning--Hoogan?"

And with the words Toddles' heart went out to the big dispatcher:
"Hoogan"--and a man-to-man tone.

"No," said Toddles cordially. "Say, I thought you were on the night
trick."

"Double-shift--short-handed," replied Donkin. "Come from New York, don't
you?"

"Yes," said Toddles.

"Mother and father down there still?"

It came quick and unexpected, and Toddles stared for a moment. Then he
walked over to the window.

"I haven't got any," he said.

There wasn't any sound for an instant, save the clicking of the
instruments; then Donkin spoke again--a little gruffly:

"When are you going to quit making a fool of yourself?"

Toddles swung from the window, hurt. Donkin, after all, was like all the
rest of them.

"Well?" prompted the dispatcher.

"You go to blazes!" said Toddles bitterly, and started for the door.

Donkin halted him.

"You're only fooling yourself, Hoogan," he said coolly. "If you wanted
what you call a real railroad job as much as you pretend you do, you'd
get one."

"Eh?" demanded Toddles defiantly; and went back to the table.

"A fellow," said Donkin, putting a little sting into his words, "never
got anywhere by going around with a chip on his shoulder fighting
everybody because they called him Toddles, and making a nuisance of
himself with the Big Fellows until they got sick of the sight of him."

It was a pretty stiff arraignment. Toddles choked over it, and the angry
blood flushed to his cheeks.

"That's all right for you!" he spluttered out hotly. "You don't look too
small for the train crews or the roundhouse, and they don't call you
Toddles so's nobody'll forget it. What'd _you_ do?"

"I'll tell you what I'd do," said Donkin quietly. "I'd make everybody
on the division wish their own name was Toddles before I was through
with them, and I'd _make_ a job for myself."

Toddles blinked helplessly.

"Getting right down to a cash fare," continued Donkin, after a moment,
as Toddles did not speak, "they're not so far wrong, either, about you
sizing up pretty small for the train crews or the roundhouse, are they?"

"No-o," admitted Toddles reluctantly; "but----"

"Then why not something where there's no handicap hanging over you?"
suggested the dispatcher--and his hand reached out and touched the
sender. "The key, for instance?"

"But I don't know anything about it," said Toddles, still helplessly.

"That's just it," returned Donkin smoothly. "You never tried to learn."

Toddles' eyes widened, and into Toddles' heart leaped a sudden joy. A
new world seemed to open out before him in which aspirations, ambitions,
longings all were a reality. A key! That _was_ real railroading, the
top-notch of railroading, too. First an operator, and then a dispatcher,
and--and--and then his face fell, and the vision faded.

"How'd I get a chance to learn?" he said miserably. "Who'd teach me?"

The smile was back on Donkin's face as he pushed his chair from the
table, stood up, and held out his hand--man-to-man fashion.

"I will," he said. "I liked your grit last night, Hoogan. And if you
want to be a railroad man, I'll make you one--before I'm through. I've
some old instruments you can have to practice with, and I've nothing to
do in my spare time. What do you say?"

Toddles didn't say anything. For the first time since Toddles' advent to
the Hill Division, there were tears in Toddles' eyes for some one else
to see.

Donkin laughed.

"All right, old man, you're on. See that you don't throw me down. And
keep your mouth shut; you'll need all your wind. It's work that counts,
and nothing else. Now chase yourself! I'll dig up the things you'll
need, and you can drop in here and get them when you come off your run
to-night."

Spare time! Bob Donkin didn't have any spare time those days! But that
was Donkin's way. Spence sick, and two men handling the dispatching
where three had handled it before, didn't leave Bob Donkin much spare
time--not much. But a boost for the kid was worth a sacrifice. Donkin
went at it as earnestly as Toddles did--and Toddles was in deadly
earnest.

When Toddles left the dispatcher's office that morning with Donkin's
promise to teach him the key, Toddles had a hazy idea that Donkin had
wings concealed somewhere under his coat and was an angel in disguise;
and at the end of two weeks he was sure of it. But at the end of a month
Bob Donkin was a god! Throw Bob Donkin down! Toddles would have sold
his soul for the dispatcher.

It wasn't easy, though; and Bob Donkin wasn't an easy-going taskmaster,
not by long odds. Donkin had a tongue, and on occasions could use it.
Short and quick in his explanations, he expected his pupil to get it
short and quick; either that, or Donkin's opinion of him. But Toddles
stuck. He'd have crawled on his knees for Donkin anywhere, and he worked
like a major--not only for his own advancement, but for what he came to
prize quite as much, if not more, Donkin's approval.

Toddles, mindful of Donkin's words, didn't fight so much as the days
went by, though he found it difficult to swear off all at once; and on
his runs he studied his Morse code, and he had the "calls" of every
station on the division off by heart right from the start. Toddles
mastered the "sending" by leaps and bounds; but the "taking" came
slower, as it does for everybody--but even at that, at the end of six
weeks, if it wasn't thrown at him too fast and hard, Toddles could get
it after a fashion.

Take it all around, Toddles felt like whistling most of the time; and,
pleased with his own progress, looked forward to starting in presently
as a full-fledged operator.

He mentioned the matter to Bob Donkin--once. Donkin picked his words and
spoke fervently. Toddles never brought the subject up again.

And so things went on. Late summer turned to early fall, and early fall
to still sharper weather, until there came the night that the operator
at Blind River muddled his orders and gave No. 73, the westbound fast
freight, her clearance against the second section of the eastbound
Limited that doomed them to meet somewhere head-on in the Glacier canyon;
the night that Toddles--but there's just a word or two that comes
before.

When it was all over, it was up to Sam Beale, the Blind River operator,
straight enough. Beale blundered. That's all there was to it; that
covers it all--he blundered. It would have finished Beale's railroad
career forever and a day--only Beale played the man, and the instant he
realized what he had done, even while the tail lights of the freight
were disappearing down the track and he couldn't stop her, he was
stammering the tale of his mistake over the wire, the sweat beads
dripping from his wrist, his face gray with horror, to Bob Donkin under
the green-shaded lamp in the dispatchers' room at Big Cloud, miles away.

Donkin got the miserable story over the chattering wire--got it before
it was half told--cut Beale out and began to pound the Gap call. And as
though it were before him in reality, that stretch of track, fifteen
miles of it, from Blind River to the Gap, unfolded itself like a grisly
panorama before his mind. There wasn't a half mile of tangent at a
single stretch in the whole of it. It swung like the writhings of a
snake, through cuts and tunnels, hugging the canyon walls, twisting this
way and that. Anywhere else there might be a chance, one in a thousand
even, that they would see each other's headlights in time--here it was
disaster quick and absolute.

Donkin's lips were set in a thin, straight line. The Gap answered him;
and the answer was like the knell of doom. He had not expected anything
else; he had only hoped against hope. The second section of the Limited
had pulled out of the Gap, eastbound, two minutes before. The two trains
were in the open against each other's orders.

In the next room, Carleton and Regan, over their pipes, were at their
nightly game of pedro. Donkin called them--and his voice sounded strange
to himself. Chairs scraped and crashed to the floor, and an instant
later the super and the master mechanic were in the room.

"What's wrong, Bob?" Carleton flung the words from him in a single
breath.

Donkin told them. But his fingers were on the key again as he talked.
There was still one chance, worse than the thousand-to-one shot; but it
was the only one. Between the Gap and Blind River, eight miles from the
Gap, seven miles from Blind River, was Cassil's Siding. But there was no
night man at Cassil's, and the little town lay a mile from the station.
It was ten o'clock--Donkin's watch lay face up on the table before
him--the day man at Cassil's went off at seven--the chance was that the
day man _might_ have come back to the station for something or other!

Not much of a chance? No--not much! It was a possibility, that was all;
and Donkin's fingers worked--the seventeen, the life and death--calling,
calling on the night trick to the day man at Cassil's Siding.

Carleton came and stood at Donkin's elbow, and Regan stood at the other;
and there was silence now, save only for the key that, under Donkin's
fingers, seemed to echo its stammering appeal about the room like the
sobbing of a human soul.

"CS--CS--CS," Donkin called; and then, "the seventeen," and then, "hold
second Number Two." And then the same thing over and over again.

And there was no answer.

It had turned cold that night and there was a fire in the little heater.
Donkin had opened the draft a little while before, and the sheet-iron
sides now began to purr red-hot. Nobody noticed it. Regan's kindly,
good-humored face had the stamp of horror in it, and he pulled at his
scraggly brown mustache, his eyes seemingly fascinated by Donkin's
fingers. Everybody's eyes, the three of them, were on Donkin's fingers
and the key. Carleton was like a man of stone, motionless, his face set
harder than face was ever carved in marble.

It grew hot in the room; but Donkin's fingers were like ice on the key,
and, strong man though he was, he faltered.

"Oh, my God!" he whispered--and never a prayer rose more fervently from
lips than those three broken words.

Again he called, and again, and again. The minutes slipped away. Still
he called--with the life and death--the "seventeen"--called and called.
And there was no answer save that echo in the room that brought the
perspiration streaming down from Regan's face, a harder light into
Carleton's eyes and a chill like death into Donkin's heart.

Suddenly Donkin pushed back his chair; and his fingers, from the key,
touched the crystal of his watch.

"The second section will have passed Cassil's now," he said in a
curious, unnatural, matter-of-fact tone. "It'll bring them together
about a mile east of there--in another minute."

And then Carleton spoke--master railroader, "Royal" Carleton, it was up
to him then, all the pity of it, the ruin, the disaster, the lives out,
all the bitterness to cope with as he could. And it was in his eyes, all
of it. But his voice was quiet. It rang quick, peremptory, his
voice--but quiet.

"Clear the line, Bob," he said. "Plug in the round-house for the
wrecker--and tell them to send uptown for the crew."

Toddles? What did Toddles have to do with this? Well, a good deal, in
one way and another. We're coming to Toddles now. You see, Toddles,
since his fracas with Hawkeye, had been put on the Elk River local run
that left Big Cloud at 9.45 in the morning for the run west, and
scheduled Big Cloud again on the return trip at 10.10 in the evening.

It had turned cold that night, after a day of rain. Pretty cold--the
thermometer can drop on occasions in the late fall in the mountains--and
by eight o'clock, where there had been rain before, there was now a thin
sheeting of ice over everything--very thin--you know the kind--rails and
telegraph wires glistening like the decorations on a Christmas
tree--very pretty--and also very nasty running on a mountain grade.
Likewise, the rain, in a way rain has, had dripped from the car roofs to
the platforms--the local did not boast any closed vestibules--and had
also been blown upon the car steps with the sweep of the wind, and,
having frozen, it stayed there. Not a very serious matter; annoying,
perhaps, but not serious, demanding a little extra caution, that was
all.

Toddles was in high fettle that night. He had been getting on famously
of late; even Bob Donkin had admitted it. Toddles, with his stack of
books and magazines, an unusually big one, for a number of the new
periodicals were out that day, was dreaming rosy dreams to himself as he
started from the door of the first-class smoker to the door of the
first-class coach. In another hour now he'd be up in the dispatcher's
room at Big Cloud for his nightly sitting with Bob Donkin. He could see
Bob Donkin there now; and he could hear the big dispatcher growl at him
in his bluff way: "Use your head--use your head--_Hoogan!_" It was
always "Hoogan," never "Toddles." "Use your head"--Donkin was
everlastingly drumming that into him; for the dispatcher used to
confront him suddenly with imaginary and hair-raising emergencies, and
demand Toddles' instant solution. Toddles realized that Donkin was
getting to the heart of things, and that some day he, Toddles, would be
a great dispatcher--like Donkin. "Use your head, Hoogan"--that's the way
Donkin talked--"anybody can learn a key, but that doesn't make a
railroad man think quick and think _right_. Use your----"

Toddles stepped out on the platform--and walked on ice. But that wasn't
Toddles' undoing. The trouble with Toddles was that he was walking on
air at the same time. It was treacherous running, they were nosing a
curve, and in the cab, Kinneard, at the throttle, checked with a little
jerk at the "air." And with the jerk, Toddles slipped; and with the
slip, the center of gravity of the stack of periodicals shifted, and
they bulged ominously from the middle. Toddles grabbed at them--and his
heels went out from under him. He ricocheted down the steps, snatched
desperately at the handrail, missed it, shot out from the train, and,
head, heels, arms and body going every which way at once, rolled over
and over down the embankment. And, starting from the point of Toddles'
departure from the train, the right of way for a hundred yards was
strewn with "the latest magazines" and "new books just out to-day."

Toddles lay there, a little, curled, huddled heap, motionless in the
darkness. The tail lights of the local disappeared. No one aboard would
miss Toddles until they got into Big Cloud--and found him gone. Which is
Irish for saying that no one would attempt to keep track of a newsboy's
idiosyncrasies on a train; it would be asking too much of any train
crew; and, besides, there was no mention of it in the rules.

It was a long while before Toddles stirred; a very long while before
consciousness crept slowly back to him. Then he moved, tried to get
up--and fell back with a quick, sharp cry of pain. He lay still, then,
for a moment. His ankle hurt him frightfully, and his back, and his
shoulder, too. He put his hand to his face where something seemed to be
trickling warm--and brought it away wet. Toddles, grim little warrior,
tried to think. They hadn't been going very fast when he fell off. If
they had, he would have been killed. As it was, he was hurt, badly hurt,
and his head swam, nauseating him.

Where was he? Was he near any help? He'd have to get help somewhere,
or--or with the cold and--and everything he'd probably die out here
before morning. Toddles shouted out--again and again. Perhaps his voice
was too weak to carry very far; anyway, there was no reply.

He looked up at the top of the embankment, clamped his teeth, and
started to crawl. If he got up there, perhaps he could tell where he
was. It had taken Toddles a matter of seconds to roll down; it took him
ten minutes of untold agony to get up. Then he dashed his hand across
his eyes where the blood was, and cried a little with the surge of
relief. East, down the track, only a few yards away, the green eye of a
switch lamp winked at him.

Where there was a switch lamp there was a siding, and where there was a
siding there was promise of a station. Toddles, with the sudden uplift
upon him, got to his feet and started along the track--two steps--and
went down again. He couldn't walk, the pain was more than he could
bear--his right ankle, his left shoulder, and his back--hopping only
made it worse--it was easier to crawl.

And so Toddles crawled.

It took him a long time even to pass the switch light. The pain made him
weak, his senses seemed to trail off giddily every now and then, and
he'd find himself lying flat and still beside the track. It was a white,
drawn face that Toddles lifted up each time he started on
again--miserably white, except where the blood kept trickling from his
forehead.

And then Toddles' heart, stout as it was, seemed to snap. He had reached
the station platform, wondering vaguely why the little building that
loomed ahead was dark--and now it came to him in a flash, as he
recognized the station. It was Cassil's Siding--_and there was no night
man at Cassil's Siding!_ The switch lights were lighted before the day
man left, of course. Everything swam before Toddles' eyes. There--there
was no help here. And yet--yet perhaps--desperate hope came
again--perhaps there might be. The pain was terrible--all over him.
And--and he'd got so weak now--but it wasn't far to the door.

Toddles squirmed along the platform, and reached the door finally--only
to find it shut and fastened. And then Toddles fainted on the threshold.

When Toddles came to himself again, he thought at first that he was up
in the dispatcher's room at Big Cloud with Bob Donkin pounding away on
the battered old key they used to practice with--only there seemed to be
something the matter with the key, and it didn't sound as loud as it
usually did--it seemed to come from a long way off somehow. And then,
besides, Bob was working it faster than he had ever done before when
they were practicing. "Hold second"--second something--Toddles couldn't
make it out. Then the "seventeen"--yes, he knew that--that was the life
and death. Bob was going pretty quick, though. Then "CS--CS--CS"--Toddles'
brain fumbled a bit over that--then it came to him. CS was the call for
Cassil's Siding. _Cassil's Siding!_ Toddles' head came up with a jerk.

A little cry burst from Toddles' lips--and his brain cleared. He wasn't
at Big Cloud at all--he was at Cassil's Siding--and he was hurt--and
that was the sounder inside calling, calling frantically for Cassil's
Siding--where he was.

The life and death--_the seventeen_--it sent a thrill through Toddles'
pain-twisted spine. He wriggled to the window. It, too, was closed, of
course, but he could hear better there. The sounder was babbling madly.

"Hold second----"

He missed it again--and as, on top of it, the "seventeen" came pleading,
frantic, urgent, he wrung his hands.

"Hold second"--he got it this time--"Number Two."

Toddles' first impulse was to smash in the window and reach the key. And
then, like a dash of cold water over him, Donkin's words seemed to ring
in his ears: "Use your head."

With the "seventeen" it meant a matter of minutes, perhaps even seconds.
Why smash the window? Why waste the moment required to do it simply to
answer the call? The order stood for itself--"Hold second Number Two."
That was the second section of the Limited, east-bound. Hold her! How?
There was nothing--not a thing to stop her with. "Use your head," said
Donkin in a far-away voice to Toddles' wobbling brain.

Toddles looked up the track--west--where he had come from--to where the
switch light twinkled green at him--and, with a little sob, he started
to drag himself back along the platform. If he could throw the switch,
it would throw the light from green to red, and--and the Limited would
take the siding. But the switch was a long way off.

Toddles half fell, half bumped from the end of the platform to the right
of way. He cried to himself with low moans as he went along. He had the
heart of a fighter, and grit to the last tissue; but he needed it all
now--needed it all to stand the pain and fight the weakness that kept
swirling over him in flashes.

On he went, on his hands and knees, slithering from tie to tie--and from
one tie to the next was a great distance. The life and death, the
dispatcher's call--he seemed to hear it yet--throbbing, throbbing on the
wire.

On he went, up the track; and the green eye of the lamp, winking at him,
drew nearer. And then suddenly, clear and mellow through the mountains,
caught up and echoed far and near, came the notes of a chime whistle
ringing down the gorge.

Fear came upon Toddles then, and a great sob shook him. That was the
Limited coming now! Toddles' fingers dug into the ballast, and he
hurried--that is, in bitter pain, he tried to crawl a little faster. And
as he crawled, he kept his eyes strained up the track--she wasn't in
sight yet around the curve--not yet, anyway.

Another foot, only another foot, and he would reach the siding
switch--in time--in plenty of time. Again the sob--but now in a burst of
relief that, for the moment, made him forget his hurts. He was in time!

He flung himself at the switch lever, tugged upon it and then,
trembling, every ounce of remaining strength seeming to ooze from him,
he covered his face with his hands. It was _locked_--padlocked.

Came a rumble now--a distant roar, growing louder and louder,
reverberating down the canyon walls--louder and louder--nearer and
nearer. "Hold second Number Two. Hold second Number Two"--the
"seventeen," the life and death, pleading with him to hold Number Two.
And she was coming now, coming--and--and--the switch was locked. The
deadly nausea racked Toddles again; there was nothing to do
now--nothing. He couldn't stop her--couldn't stop her. He'd--he'd
tried--very hard--and--and he couldn't stop her now. He took his hands
from his face, and stole a glance up the track, afraid almost, with the
horror that was upon him, to look.

She hadn't swung the curve yet, but she would in a minute--and come
pounding down the stretch at fifty miles an hour, shoot by him like a
rocket to where, somewhere ahead, in some form, he did not know what,
only knew that it was there, death and ruin and----

"_Use your head!_" snapped Donkin's voice to his consciousness.

Toddles' eyes were on the light above his head. It blinked _red_ at him
as he stood on the track facing it; the green rays were shooting up and
down the line. He couldn't swing the switch--but the _lamp_ was
there--and there was the red side to show just by turning it. He
remembered then that the lamp fitted into a socket at the top of the
switch stand, and could be lifted off--if he could reach it!

It wasn't very high--for an ordinary-sized man--for an ordinary-sized
man had to get at it to trim and fill it daily--only Toddles wasn't an
ordinary-sized man. It was just nine or ten feet above the rails--just a
standard siding switch.

Toddles gritted his teeth, and climbed upon the base of the switch--and
nearly fainted as his ankle swung against the rod. A foot above the base
was a footrest for a man to stand on and reach up for the lamp, and
Toddles drew himself up and got his foot on it--and then at his full
height the tips of his fingers only just touched the bottom of the lamp.
Toddles cried aloud, and the tears streamed down his face now. Oh, if he
weren't hurt--if he could only shin up another foot--but--but it was all
he could do to hang there where he was.

_What was that!_ He turned his head. Up the track, sweeping in a great
circle as it swung the curve, a headlight's glare cut through the
night--and Toddles "shinned" the foot. He tugged and tore at the lamp,
tugged and tore at it, loosened it, lifted it from its socket, sprawled
and wriggled with it to the ground--and turned the red side of the lamp
against second Number Two.

The quick, short blasts of a whistle answered, then the crunch and grind
and scream of biting brake-shoes--and the big mountain racer, the 1012,
pulling the second section of the Limited that night, stopped with its
pilot nosing a diminutive figure in a torn and silver-buttoned uniform,
whose hair was clotted red, and whose face was covered with blood and
dirt.

Masters, the engineer, and Pete Leroy, his fireman, swung from the
gangways; Kelly, the conductor, came running up from the forward coach.

Kelly shoved his lamp into Toddles' face--and whistled low under his
breath.

"Toddles!" he gasped; and then, quick as a steel trap: "What's wrong?"

"I don't know," said Toddles weakly. "There's--there's something wrong.
Get into the clear--on the siding."

"Something wrong," repeated Kelly, "and you don't----"

But Masters cut the conductor short with a grab at the other's arm that
was like the shutting of a vise--and then bolted for his engine like a
gopher for its hole. From down the track came the heavy, grumbling roar
of a freight. Everybody flew then, and there was quick work done in the
next half minute--and none too quickly done--the Limited was no more
than on the siding when the fast freight rolled her long string of
flats, boxes and gondolas thundering by.

And while she passed, Toddles, on the platform, stammered out his story
to Kelly.

Kelly didn't say anything--then. With the express messenger and a
brakeman carrying Toddles, Kelly kicked in the station door, and set his
lamp down on the operator's table.

"Hold me up," whispered Toddles--and, while they held him, he made the
dispatcher's call.

Big Cloud answered him on the instant. Haltingly, Toddles reported the
second section "in" and the freight "out"--only he did it very slowly,
and he couldn't think very much more, for things were going black. He
got an order for the Limited to run to Blind River and told Kelly, and
got the "complete"--and then Big Cloud asked who was on the wire, and
Toddles answered that in a mechanical sort of a way without quite
knowing what he was doing--and went limp in Kelly's arms.

And as Toddles answered, back in Big Cloud, Regan, the sweat still
standing out in great beads on his forehead, fierce now in the revulsion
of relief, glared over Donkin's left shoulder, as Donkin's left hand
scribbled on a pad what was coming over the wire.

Regan glared fiercely--then he spluttered:

"Who's Christopher Hyslop Hoogan--h'm?"

Donkin's lips had a queer smile on them.

"Toddles," he said.

Regan sat down heavily in his chair.

"_What?_" demanded the super.

"Toddles," said Donkin. "I've been trying to drum a little railroading
into him--on the key."

Regan wiped his face. He looked helplessly from Donkin to the super, and
then back again at Donkin.

"But--but what's he doing at Cassil's Siding? How'd he get there--h'm?
H'm? How'd he get there?"

"I don't know," said Donkin, his fingers rattling the Cassil's Siding
call again. "He doesn't answer any more. We'll have to wait for the
story till they make Blind River, I guess."

And so they waited. And presently at Blind River, Kelly, dictating to
the operator--not Beale, Beale's day man--told the story. It lost
nothing in the telling--Kelly wasn't that kind of man--he told them what
Toddles had done, and he left nothing out; and he added that they had
Toddles on a mattress in the baggage car, with a doctor they had
discovered amongst the passengers looking after him.

At the end, Carleton tamped down the dottle in the bowl of his pipe
thoughtfully with his forefinger--and glanced at Donkin.

"Got along far enough to take a station key somewhere?" he inquired
casually. "He's made a pretty good job of it as the night operator at
Cassil's."

Donkin was smiling.

"Not yet," he said.

"No?" Carleton's eyebrows went up. "Well, let him come in here with you,
then, till he has; and when you say he's ready, we'll see what we can
do. I guess it's coming to him; and I guess"--he shifted his glance to
the master mechanic--"I guess we'll go down and meet Number Two when she
comes in, Tommy."

Regan grinned.

"With our hats in our hands," said the big-hearted master mechanic.

Donkin shook his head.

"Don't you do it," he said. "I don't want him to get a swelled head."

Carleton stared; and Regan's hand, reaching into his back pocket for his
chewing, stopped midway.

Donkin was still smiling.

"I'm going to make a railroad man out of Toddles," he said.

FOOTNOTE:

[10] One of a number of stories from book bearing same title, _The Night
Operator_. Copyright, 1919, by George H. Doran Company. Reprinted by
special permission of publisher and author.




[Illustration]




XI.--Christmas Eve in a Lumber Camp[11]

_By Ralph Connor_


IT was due to a mysterious dispensation of Providence and a good deal to
Leslie Graeme that I found myself in the heart of the Selkirks for my
Christmas eve as the year 1882 was dying. It had been my plan to spend
my Christmas far away in Toronto, with such bohemian and boon companions
as could be found in that cosmopolitan and kindly city. But Leslie
Graeme changed all that, for, discovering me in the village of Black
Rock, with my traps all packed, waiting for the stage to start for the
Landing, thirty miles away, he bore down upon me with resistless force,
and I found myself recovering from my surprise only after we had gone in
his lumber sleigh some six miles on our way to his camp up in the
mountains. I was surprised and much delighted, though I would not allow
him to think so, to find that his old-time power over me was still
there. He could always in the old varsity days--dear, wild days--make
me do what he liked. He was so handsome and so reckless, brilliant in
his class work, and the prince of half backs on the Rugby field, and
with such power of fascination as would "extract the heart out of a
wheelbarrow," as Barney Lundy used to say. And thus it was that I found
myself just three weeks later--I was to have spent two or three days--on
the afternoon of December 24, standing in Graeme's Lumber Camp No. 2,
wondering at myself. But I did not regret my changed plans, for in those
three weeks I had raided a cinnamon bear's den and had wakened up a
grizzly---- But I shall let the grizzly finish the tale; he probably
sees more humor in it than I.

The camp stood in a little clearing, and consisted of a group of three
long, low shanties with smaller shacks near them, all built of heavy,
unhewn logs, with door and window in each. The grub camp, with cook-shed
attached, stood in the middle of the clearing; at a little distance was
the sleeping camp with the office built against it, and about a hundred
yards away on the other side of the clearing stood the stables, and near
them the smiddy. The mountains rose grandly on every side, throwing up
their great peaks into the sky. The clearing in which the camp stood was
hewn out of a dense pine forest that filled the valley and climbed
halfway up the mountain sides and then frayed out in scattered and
stunted trees.

It was one of those wonderful Canadian winter days, bright, and with a
touch of sharpness in the air that did not chill, but warmed the blood
like drafts of wine. The men were up in the woods, and the shrill scream
of the bluejay flashing across the open, the impudent chatter of the red
squirrel from the top of the grub camp, and the pert chirp of the
whisky-jack, hopping about on the rubbish-heap, with the long, lone cry
of the wolf far down the valley, only made the silence felt the more.

As I stood drinking in with all my soul the glorious beauty and the
silence of mountain and forest, with the Christmas feeling stealing into
me, Graeme came out from his office, and catching sight of me, called
out, "Glorious Christmas weather, old chap!" And then, coming nearer,
"Must you go to-morrow?"

"I fear so," I replied, knowing well that the Christmas feeling was on
him, too.

"I wish I were going with you," he said quietly.

I turned eagerly to persuade him, but at the look of suffering in his
face the words died at my lips, for we both were thinking of the awful
night of horror when all his bright, brilliant life crashed down about
him in black ruin and shame. I could only throw my arm over his shoulder
and stand silent beside him. A sudden jingle of bells roused him, and,
giving himself a little shake, he exclaimed, "There are the boys coming
home."

Soon the camp was filled with men talking, laughing, chaffing like
light-hearted boys.

"They are a little wild to-night," said Graeme, "and to-morrow they'll
paint Black Rock red."

Before many minutes had gone the last teamster was "washed up," and all
were standing about waiting impatiently for the cook's signal--the
supper to-night was to be "something of a feed"--when the sound of bells
drew their attention to a light sleigh drawn by a buckskin broncho
coming down the hillside at a great pace.

"The preacher, I'll bet, by his driving," said one of the men.

"Bedad, and it's him has the foine nose for turkey!" said Blaney, a
good-natured, jovial Irishman.

"Yes, or for pay-day, more like," said Keefe, a black-browed, villainous
fellow countryman of Blaney's and, strange to say, his great friend.

Big Sandy McNaughton, a Canadian Highlander from Glengarry, rose up in
wrath.

"Bill Keefe," said he with deliberate emphasis, "you'll just keep your
dirty tongue off the minister; and as for your pay, it's little he sees
of it, or any one else except Mike Slavin, when you's too dry to wait
for some one to treat you, or perhaps Father Ryan, when the fear of
hell-fire is on you."

The men stood amazed at Sandy's sudden anger and length of speech.

"_Bon!_ Dat's good for you, my bully boy," said Baptiste, a wiry little
French-Canadian, Sandy's sworn ally and devoted admirer ever since the
day when the big Scotchman, under great provocation, had knocked him
clean off the dump into the river and then jumped in for him.

It was not till afterward I learned the cause of Sandy's sudden wrath
which urged him to such unwonted length of speech. It was not simply
that the Presbyterian blood carried with it reverence for the minister,
but that he had a vivid remembrance of how, only a month ago, the
minister had got him out of Mike Slavin's saloon and out of the clutches
of Keefe and Slavin and their gang of bloodsuckers.

Keefe started up with a curse. Baptiste sprang to Sandy's side, slapped
him on the back, and called out:

"You keel him, I'll hit [eat] him up, me."

It looked as if there might be a fight, when a harsh voice said in a
low, savage tone:

"Stop your row, you fools; settle it, if you want to, somewhere else."

I turned, and was amazed to see old man Nelson, who was very seldom
moved to speech.

There was a look of scorn on his hard iron-gray face, and of such
settled fierceness as made me quite believe the tales I had heard of his
deadly fights in the mines at the coast. Before any reply could be made
the minister drove up and called out in a cheery voice:

"Merry Christmas, boys! Hello, Sandy! _Comment ca va_, Baptiste? How do
you do, Mr. Graeme?"

"First rate. Let me introduce my friend, Mr. Connor, sometime medical
student, now artist, hunter, and tramp at large, but not a bad sort."

"A man to be envied," said the minister, smiling. "I am glad to know any
friend of Mr. Graeme's."

I liked Mr. Craig from the first. He had good eyes that looked straight
out at you, a clean-cut, strong face well set on his shoulders, and
altogether an upstanding, manly bearing. He insisted on going with Sandy
to the stables to see Dandy, his broncho, put up.

"Decent fellow," said Graeme; "but though he is good enough to his
broncho, it is Sandy that's in his mind now."

"Does he come out often? I mean, are you part of his parish, so to
speak?"

"I have no doubt he thinks so; and I'm blowed if he doesn't make the
Presbyterians of us think so too." And he added after a pause: "A dandy
lot of parishioners we are for any man. There's Sandy, now, he would
knock Keefe's head off as a kind of religious exercise; but to-morrow
Keefe will be sober and Sandy will be drunk as a lord, and the drunker
he is the better Presbyterian he'll be, to the preacher's disgust." Then
after another pause he added bitterly: "But it is not for me to throw
rocks at Sandy. I am not the same kind of fool, but I am a fool of
several other sorts."

Then the cook came out and beat a tattoo on the bottom of a dishpan.
Baptiste answered with a yell. But though keenly hungry, no man would
demean himself to do other than walk with apparent reluctance to his
place at the table. At the further end of the camp was a big fireplace,
and from the door of the fireplace extended the long board tables,
covered with platters of turkey not too scientifically carved, dishes of
potatoes, bowls of apple sauce, plates of butter, pies, and smaller
dishes distributed at regular intervals. Two lanterns hanging from the
roof and a row of candles stuck into the wall on either side by means of
slit sticks cast a dim, weird light over the scene.

There was a moment's silence, and at a nod from Graeme Mr. Craig rose
and said:

"I don't know how you feel about it, men, but to me this looks good
enough to be thankful for."

"Fire ahead, sir," called out a voice quite respectfully, and the
minister bent his head and said:

"For Christ the Lord who came to save us, for all the love and goodness
we have known, and for these Thy gifts to us this Christmas night, our
Father, make us thankful. Amen."

"_Bon!_ Dat's fuss rate," said Baptiste. "Seems lak dat's make me hit
[eat] more better for sure." And then no word was spoken for a quarter
of an hour. The occasion was far too solemn and moments too precious for
anything so empty as words. But when the white piles of bread and the
brown piles of turkey had for a second time vanished, and after the last
pie had disappeared, there came a pause and a hush of expectancy,
whereupon the cook and cookee, each bearing aloft a huge, blazing
pudding, came forth.

"Hooray!" yelled Blaney; "up wid yez!" and grabbing the cook by the
shoulders from behind, he faced him about.

Mr. Craig was the first to respond, and seizing the cookee in the same
way, called out: "Squad, fall in! quick march!" In a moment every man
was in the procession.

"Strike up, Batchees, ye little angel!" shouted Blaney, the appellation
a concession to the minister's presence; and away went Baptiste in a
rollicking French song with the English chorus--

          Then blow, ye winds, in the morning,
            Blow, ye winds, ay oh!
          Blow, ye winds, in the morning,
            Blow, blow, blow.

And at each "blow" every boot came down with a thump on the plank floor
that shook the solid roof. After the second round Mr. Craig jumped upon
the bench and called out:

"Three cheers for Billy the cook!"

In the silence following the cheers Baptiste was heard to say:

"_Bon!_ Dat's mak me feel lak hit dat puddin' all hup meself, me."

"Hear till the little baste!" said Blaney in disgust.

"Batchees," remonstrated Sandy gravely, "ye've more stomach than
manners."

"Fu sure! but de more stomach, dat's more better for dis puddin',"
replied the little Frenchman cheerfully.

After a time the tables were cleared and pushed back to the wall and
pipes were produced. In all attitudes suggestive of comfort the men
disposed themselves in a wide circle about the fire, which now roared
and crackled up the great wooden chimney hanging from the roof. The
lumberman's hour of bliss had arrived. Even old man Nelson looked a
shade less melancholy than usual as he sat alone, well away from the
fire, smoking steadily and silently. When the second pipes were well
a-going one of the men took down a violin from the wall and handed it to
Lachlan Campbell. There were two brothers Campbell just out from Argyll,
typical Highlanders: Lachlan, dark, silent, melancholy, with the face of
a mystic, and Angus, red-haired, quick, impulsive, and devoted to his
brother, a devotion he thought proper to cover under biting, sarcastic
speech.

Lachlan, after much protestation, interposed with gibes from his
brother, took the violin, and in response to the call from all sides
struck up "Lord Macdonald's Reel."

In a moment the floor was filled with dancers, whooping and cracking
their fingers in the wildest manner. Then Baptiste did the "Red River
Jig," a most intricate and difficult series of steps, the men keeping
time to the music with hands and feet.

When the jig was finished Sandy called for "Lochaber No More," but
Campbell said:

"No! no! I cannot play that to-night. Mr. Craig will play."

Craig took the violin, and at the first note I knew he was no ordinary
player. I did not recognize the music, but it was soft and thrilling,
and got in by the heart till every one was thinking his tenderest and
saddest thoughts.

After he had played two or three exquisite bits he gave Campbell his
violin, saying, "Now, 'Lochaber,' Lachlan."

Without a word Lachlan began, not "Lochaber"--he was not ready for that
yet--but "The Flowers o' the Forest," and from that wandered through
"Auld Robin Gray" and "The Land o' the Leal," and so got at last to that
most soul-subduing of Scottish laments, "Lochaber No More." At the first
strain his brother, who had thrown himself on some blankets behind the
fire, turned over on his face feigning sleep. Sandy McNaughton took his
pipe out of his mouth and sat up straight and stiff, staring into
vacancy, and Graeme, beyond the fire, drew a short, sharp breath. We had
often sat, Graeme and I, in our student days, in the drawing-room at
home, listening to his father wailing out "Lochaber" upon the pipes, and
I well knew that the awful minor strains were now eating their way into
his soul.

Over and over again the Highlander played his lament. He had long since
forgotten us, and was seeing visions of the hills and lochs and glens of
his far-away native land, and making us, too, see strange things out of
the dim past. I glanced at old man Nelson, and was startled at the
eager, almost piteous look in his eyes, and I wished Campbell would
stop. Mr. Craig caught my eye, and stepping over to Campbell held out
his hand for the violin. Lingeringly and lovingly the Highlander drew
out the last strain and silently gave the minister his instrument.

Without a moment's pause, and while the spell of "Lochaber" was still
upon us, the minister, with exquisite skill, fell into the refrain of
that simple and beautiful camp-meeting hymn, "The Sweet By-and-By."
After playing the verse through once he sang softly the refrain. After
the first verse the men joined in the chorus; at first timidly, but by
the time the third verse was reached they were shouting with throats
full open, "We shall meet on that beautiful shore." When I looked at
Nelson the eager light had gone out of his eyes, and in its place was a
kind of determined hopelessness, as if in this new music he had no part.

After the voices had ceased Mr. Craig played again the refrain, more and
more softly and slowly; then laying the violin on Campbell's knees, he
drew from his pocket his little Bible and said:

"Men, with Mr. Graeme's permission I want to read you something this
Christmas eve. You will all have heard it before, but you will like it
none the less for that."

His voice was soft, but clear and penetrating, as he read the eternal
story of the angels and the shepherds and the Babe. And as he read, a
slight motion of the hand or a glance of an eye made us see, as he was
seeing, that whole radiant drama. The wonder, the timid joy, the
tenderness, the mystery of it all, were borne in upon us with
overpowering effect. He closed the book, and in the same low, clear
voice went on to tell us how, in his home years ago, he used to stand on
Christmas eve listening in thrilling delight to his mother telling him
the story, and how she used to make him see the shepherds and hear the
sheep bleating near by, and how the sudden burst of glory used to make
his heart jump.

"I used to be a little afraid of the angels, because a boy told me they
were ghosts; but my mother told me better, and I didn't fear them any
more. And the Baby, the dear little Baby--we all love a baby." There was
a quick, dry sob; it was from Nelson. "I used to peek through under to
see the little one in the straw, and wonder what things swaddling
clothes were. Oh, it was so real and so beautiful!" He paused, and I
could hear the men breathing.

"But one Christmas eve," he went on in a lower, sweeter tone, "there was
no one to tell me the story, and I grew to forget it and went away to
college, and learned to think that it was only a child's tale and was
not for men. Then bad days came to me and worse, and I began to lose my
grip of myself, of life, of hope, of goodness, till one black Christmas,
in the slums of a far-away city, when I had given up all and the devil's
arms were about me, I heard the story again. And as I listened, with a
bitter ache in my heart--for I had put it all behind me--I suddenly
found myself peeking under the shepherds' arms with a child's wonder at
the Baby in the straw. Then it came over me like great waves that His
name was Jesus, because it was He that should save men from their sins.
Save! Save! The waves kept beating upon my ears, and before I knew I had
called out, 'Oh! can He save me?' It was in a little mission meeting on
one of the side streets, and they seemed to be used to that sort of
thing there, for no one was surprised; and a young fellow leaned across
the aisle to me and said: 'Why, you just bet He can!' His surprise that
I should doubt, his bright face and confident tone, gave me hope that
perhaps it might be so. I held to that hope with all my soul,
and"--stretching up his arms, and with a quick glow in his face and a
little break in his voice--"He hasn't failed me yet; not once, not
once!"

He stopped quite short, and I felt a good deal like making a fool of
myself, for in those days I had not made up my mind about these things.
Graeme, poor old chap, was gazing at him with a sad yearning in his dark
eyes; big Sandy was sitting very stiff and staring harder than ever into
the fire; Baptiste was trembling with excitement; Blaney was openly
wiping the tears away, but the face that held my eyes was that of old
man Nelson. It was white, fierce, hungry-looking, his sunken eyes
burning, his lips parted as if to cry. The minister went on.

"I didn't mean to tell you this, men; it all came over me with a rush;
but it is true, every word, and not a word will I take back. And,
what's more, I can tell you this: what He did for me He can do for any
man, and it doesn't make any difference what's behind him, and"--leaning
slightly forward, and with a little thrill of pathos vibrating in his
voice--"oh, boys, why don't you give Him a chance at you? Without Him
you'll never be the men you want to be, and you'll never get the better
of that that's keeping some of you now from going back home. You know
you'll never go back till you're the men you want to be." Then, lifting
up his face and throwing back his head, he said, as if to himself,
"Jesus! He shall save His people from their sins," and then, "Let us
pray."

Graeme leaned forward with his face in his hands; Baptiste and Blaney
dropped on their knees; Sandy, the Campbells, and some others stood up.
Old man Nelson held his eye steadily on the minister.

Only once before had I seen that look on a human face. A young fellow
had broken through the ice on the river at home, and as the black water
was dragging his fingers one by one from the slippery edges, there came
over his face that same look. I used to wake up for many a night after
in a sweat of horror, seeing the white face with its parting lips and
its piteous, dumb appeal, and the black water slowly sucking it down.

Nelson's face brought it all back; but during the prayer the face
changed and seemed to settle into resolve of some sort, stern, almost
gloomy, as of a man with his last chance before him.

After the prayer Mr. Craig invited the men to a Christmas dinner next
day in Black Rock. "And because you are an independent lot, we'll charge
you half a dollar for dinner and the evening show." Then leaving a
bundle of magazines and illustrated papers on the table--a godsend to
the men--he said good-by and went out.

I was to go with the minister, so I jumped into the sleigh first and
waited while he said good-by to Graeme, who had been hard hit by the
whole service and seemed to want to say something. I heard Mr. Craig say
cheerfully and confidently: "It's a true bill: try Him."

Sandy, who had been steadying Dandy while that interesting broncho was
attempting with great success to balance himself on his hind legs, came
to say good-by.

"Come and see me first thing, Sandy."

"Aye! I know; I'll see ye, Mr. Craig," said Sandy earnestly as Dandy
dashed off at a full gallop across the clearing and over the bridge,
steadying down when he reached the hill.

"Steady, you idiot!"

This was to Dandy, who had taken a sudden side spring into the deep
snow, almost upsetting us. A man stepped out from the shadow. It was old
man Nelson. He came straight to the sleigh and, ignoring my presence
completely, said:

"Mr. Craig, are you dead sure of this? Will it work?"

"Do you mean," said Craig, taking him up promptly, "can Jesus Christ
save you from your sins and make a man of you?"

The old man nodded, keeping his hungry eyes on the other's face.

"Well, here's His message to you: 'The Son of Man is come to seek and to
save that which was lost.'"

"To me? To me?" said the old man eagerly.

"Listen; this, too, is His word: 'Him that cometh unto Me I will in no
wise cast out.' That's for you, for here you are, coming."

"You don't know me, Mr. Craig. I left my baby fifteen years ago
because----"

"Stop!" said the minister. "Don't tell me, at least not to-night;
perhaps never. Tell Him who knows it all now and who never betrays a
secret. Have it out with Him. Don't be afraid to trust Him."

Nelson looked at him, with his face quivering, and said in a husky
voice:

"If this is no good, it's hell for me."

"If it is no good," replied Craig almost sternly, "it's hell for all of
us."

The old man straightened himself up, looked up at the stars, then back
at Mr. Craig, then at me, and drawing a deep breath said:

"I'll try Him." As he was turning away the minister touched him on the
arm and said quietly:

"Keep an eye on Sandy to-morrow."

Nelson nodded and we went on; but before we took the next turn I looked
back and saw what brought a lump into my throat. It was old man Nelson
on his knees in the snow, with his hands spread upward to the stars,
and I wondered if there was any One above the stars and nearer than the
stars who could see. And then the trees hid him from my sight.

FOOTNOTE:

[11] From _Black Rock_. Reprinted by special permission of publisher,
The Fleming H. Revell Company.




[Illustration]




XII.--The Story That the Keg Told Me

_By Adirondack (W. H. H.) Murray_

          _The author is "Adirondack Murray" because he,
          more than any other man, rediscovered for the past
          and present generation the wonderful Adirondack
          Woods. We are grateful to Mr. Archibald Rutledge
          for having shortened the story, and to Mr.
          Murray's publishers, De Wolfe and Fiske Company,
          for permission to print it in the abbreviated
          form._--THE EDITOR.


IT was near the close of a sultry day in midsummer, which I had spent in
exploring a part of the shore line of the lake where I was camping, and
wearied with the trip I had made, I was returning toward the camp.

The lake was a very secluded sheet of water hidden away between the
mountains, not marked on the map, whose very existence was unsuspected
by me until I had a few days before accidentally stumbled upon it.
Indeed, in all the world there is hardly another sheet of water so
likely to escape the eye, not only of the tourist and the sportsman, but
also of the hunter and the trapper. Day by day as I paddled over the
lake or explored its shores the conviction grew upon me that the place
had never before been visited by any human being. The more I examined
and explored, the more this belief grew upon me. The thought was ever
with me. But on this afternoon as I was paddling leisurely along, my
paddle struck some curious object in the water. I reached down and
lifted it into the boat. It was a Keg!

Amazed, I sat looking at this proof that my lake was not so unknown as I
had supposed it to be. Where had it come from? How did it get here? Who
brought it, and for what purpose? These and similar questions I put to
myself as I paddled onward toward my camp.

After having built my camp fire I seated myself with my back against a
pine; it was then that my gaze again fell on the Keg, which I had
brought up from the boat and had set on the ground across the fire from
me. I sat wondering where it had come from, and what had become of him
who must once have handled it. . . . It may be that I was awake; it may
be that I was asleep; but as I was thus looking steadily and curiously
at the Keg, it seemed to change its appearance. It was no longer a Keg:
it was a man! A queer little man he was, with strange little legs, and
the funniest little body, and the tiniest little face! Then, standing
bold upright, and looking at me with eyes that glistened like black
beads, the miraculous Keg-Man opened his mouth and began to talk!

"I desire to tell you my story," it said; "the story of the man who
brought me here; why he did it, and what became of him; how he lived and
died.

"The earliest remembrance I have of myself is of the cooper's shop where
I was made. Although I look worn now, I can recall the time when all my
staves were smooth and clean, so that the oak-grain showed clearly from
the top to the bottom of me, and my steel hoops were strong and bright.
The cooper made me on his honor and took a deal of honest pride in
putting me together, as every workman should in doing his work. I
remember that when I was finished and the cooper had sanded me off and
oiled me, he set me up on a bench and said to his apprentice boy:
'There, that Keg will last till the Judgment Day, and well on toward
night at that.' I wondered at that.

"One day a few weeks later a man came into the shop and said, 'Have you
a good strong keg for sale?'

"He put the question in such a half-spiteful, half-suspicious way that I
eyed him curiously. And a very peculiar man I saw. He was not more than
forty years old, of good height and strongly built. He was a gentleman,
evidently, although his face was darkly tanned and his clothes were old
and threadbare. His mouth was small. His lips were thin, and had a look
of being drawn tightly over his teeth. His chin was long, his jaws large
and strong. His hair was thin and brown. But the remarkable feature of
his face was his eyes. They were blue-gray in color, small, and deeply
set under his arching eye-brows. How hard and steel-like they were, and
restless as a rat's! And what an intense look of suspicion there was in
them; a half-scared, defiant look, as if their owner felt every one to
be his enemy. Ah, what eyes they were! I came to know them well
afterward, and to know what the wild, strange light in them meant; but
of that by and by.

"'Have you a good strong keg for sale?' he shouted to my master, who
turned round and looked squarely at the questioner.

"'Yes, I have, Mr. Roberts. Do you want one?'

"'Yes!' returned the other; 'but I want a strong one--_strong_, do you
hear?'

"'Here's a keg,' said my master, tapping me with his mallet, 'that I
made with my own hands from the very best stuff. It will last as long as
steel and white oak staves will last.'

"The price was paid with a muttered protest and Roberts hoisted me under
his arm and bore me from the shop.

"As we hurried along, I noticed that my new master spoke to no one, and
that people looked at him coldly or wonderingly. At last we came to a
common-looking house set back from the road, with a very high fence
built around it and a heavy padlock on the front gate. There were great
strong wooden shutters at every window. My master entered the house and
set me down on the floor, then went to the door and locked it, drawing
two large iron bars across it. He went to every window to see if it was
fastened.

Carrying a candle in one hand and a great bludgeon in the other, he
examined every room, every closet, the attic, and the cellar. After this
he came back to me, set me on a table, started one of my hoops, and took
out one of my heads. From a cupboard he got a large sheepskin, and with
a pair of shears fitted me with a lining of it. I must say that he did
it with cleverness, and he seemed well pleased with his work.

"When he had done all this, he brought his bludgeon and laid it on the
table beside me; also he laid there a large knife. Then he went to the
chimney and brought the ash-pail, which was full of ashes; from the
cupboard he brought an earthen jar; from under the bed he fetched a bag;
from the cellar he returned with a sack, all damp and moldy. When he had
all these side by side near the table, he sat down. Then out of the
ash-pail he took a small pot, and having carefully blown the ashes off,
he turned it bottom-upward on the table. And what do you think was in
it?

"Gold coins! Some red and some yellow, but all gold!

"He emptied each of the other receptacles, and out there flowed heaps of
gold coins almost without number! How they gleamed and glistened! How
they clinked and jingled! And how the deep and narrow eyes of my master
glittered, but how the lips drew apart in a wild smile!

"It was a fearful sight to see him playing with the gold and to hear him
laugh over his treasure. It was dreadful to think that a human soul
could love money so. And he did love it--madly, with all the strength of
his nature.

"He would take up a coin and look at it as a father might look upon the
face of a favorite child. Ah, me, 'twas dreadful! He would take up a
piece and say to it, 'Thou art better to me than a wife'; and to
another, 'Thou art dearer than father or mother!' Ah, such blasphemy as
I heard that night! How the sweet and blessed things of human life were
derided, and the things that are divine and holy sneered at!

"At length he fell to counting his gold; and for a long, long time he
counted, until his hands shook, and his eyes gleamed as if he were mad.
When he had counted all, he jumped from his seat, shouting like a
maniac, 'Sixteen thousand, six hundred and sixty-six dollars!' Again and
again he shouted this in wild triumph.

"After a while he sobered down, and inside of me he began to pack away
his treasures--carefully, caressingly, as a mother might lay her
children to sleep. When I was full to the brim with shining gold, he put
my head on, fitted the upper hoop on snugly, and then put me in the bed.
The great knife he slipped under the pillow. Then, blowing out the
light, he lay down beside me with one arm thrown about me. So the
miser, clasping me to his heart, fell asleep.

"Day after day, night after night, this selfsame performance was
repeated. My master did little work; indeed, he did not seem eager to
increase his store, but merely to hold it safely. But about this he was
so anxious that he was in a fever of excitement all the time. For days
he would not leave the house. Never was he free from the fear of losing
his money. And this suspicion had poisoned his whole life, had made him
hate his kind and lose all belief in the love and the goodness of God,
that he had once professed.

"One day in summer he left the front door open. I was drowsing, when
suddenly I heard him give a frightened yell. In the doorway stood a man
and a woman. The man was the village pastor, and the woman, I soon
learned, was my master's wife. For a moment my master stood looking
angrily at them. Then he said abruptly, 'Why did you come here?'

"'John,' said the woman, 'your child Mary is dying; and I thought that
you, her father, would want to see her before she passed away.' Her
voice choked, and her breast heaved with sobs.

"'Dying, is she?' said my master brutally. 'I don't believe it. You are
simply after my gold. You might as well get away from here,' he added
with a threatening look.

"'John,' returned the woman, great tears coming to her eyes, 'I never in
my life lied to you. Mary is dying, and I could not let her go without
giving you a chance to see her. Last night in her delirium she begged
for you. She wants you, John; she wants to say good-by to you!'

"But my master remained unmoved. The sinister look in the eyes, the
doggedness of the face did not change. He stared at them; then he
shouted in frenzy: 'You lie! You want my money! Everybody wants it!
Everybody loves it! There isn't an honest man in the world! All are
thieves! All are lovers of gold! I know by your looks that you love it,'
he went on; 'and you can't fool me by your tears and your preaching. You
get out of this house!' he suddenly shrieked, 'or I will kill you,--both
of you!' He swore a terrible oath and stepped back to seize the heavy
bludgeon on the table. The woman cried out in fear and turned away
weeping. But the parson stood his ground.

"'John Roberts,' he said, 'thou art a doomed man. The lust of gold that
destroys so many is in thee strong and mighty, and only God can save
thee, nor He against thy will. Repent, or thou shalt perish in a lonely
place, on a dark night, with none to help thee or hear thy cries; and
all thy gold shall perish with thee.' So saying, he turned and slowly
left the house.

"For a moment my master stood glaring at the retreating forms of those
who had come to him as friends, but whom he had treated as enemies; then
he rushed for the door and locked it. After that he lifted me tenderly
upon the table, laughed softly, patted me with his hands, and stroked me
caressingly. 'My gold,' he kept repeating, 'my precious, precious gold!'
And as night came on, he poured out the gold and counted the glittering
pieces. Again and again he counted his treasure until deep midnight had
settled over all.

"But when he awoke in the morning he was very nervous. All day long he
neither opened the door nor unbarred the shutters. All the while he kept
muttering to himself as if planning some crafty plot. I could not know
what all this might mean, but I caught enough of his talk to understand
that he was more than ever suspicious of losing his money, was fearing
all man-kind more and more, and was trying to devise some scheme whereby
he could find a place where no one could molest him or try to steal his
gold. 'They will get it yet,' he kept saying, 'unless I can go where no
one can find me.' Then he would curse his kind.

"At last, after hours of muttering and tramping back and forth in the
darkened house, he suddenly seemed to find his decision. I shall never
forget the terrible expression of evil triumph on his face as he paused
before me and shouted:

"'I'll go! Go where they can never find me! I want to be alone with my
money, where I can spread it out and see it shine! I will go where there
is not a man!'

"After my master had said that, he made no further remarks; but he
began with eager haste to pack a few things for his journey. He put me
in a sack in which I could neither see nor hear what was happening; and
that was all I knew for many a day. But all the while I felt myself
being _carried, carried, carried_! One day I realized that I had been
put in a boat; then we went on and on, day after day. Finally the boat
was stopped and I was carried ashore. Then for the first time in many a
long day I was taken from the bag. Again I saw the world about me. But
how different were my surroundings from those of my old home! Where was
I? I was on the very point of land off which you found me this evening.

"For the first few weeks of our stay on the shores of this lonely lake,
things continued almost as they had been at home. The gold was my
master's single thought. He seemed happy, almost joyous, in the thought
that he and I were at last out of the reach of men. Most of his time was
spent looking at his gold. Every morning and every evening he would take
me down to that point yonder where the sun shines clearly, and there
would pour the treasure out in a great pile. He always did this
exultingly. And his greatest pleasure was to play with the yellow coins,
to count them over and over, and to laugh to himself in a satisfied way.

"But after a time I could see that a change was coming over my master.
He grew grave and quiet. No, more, as he poured out his gold, did he
chuckle and laugh to himself. All his movements seemed listless. He
counted his money less frequently, and when he did so it was in a
half-hearted manner. One day I even saw him go away and leave the yellow
heap lying on the sands. At last one day he came, packed the gold in me,
and put in my head with the greatest care. Moreover, when he went back
to the camp, he left me there on the beach! I felt very strange and
lonely, and the night seemed long indeed.

"At last the daybreak came, and glad I was to see it. But it was not
until near sunset that my master came down to the point where I was. His
face was as I had never seen it before. It was the countenance of a man
who had suffered much, and who was still suffering. He came to me,
paused before me, and said: 'For thee, thou cursed gold, I have wasted
my life and ruined my soul!'

"For some time he stood thus looking at me; then he began to walk up and
down the strip of beach, wringing his hands and beating his breast. 'Oh,
if I could only do it!' he kept saying; 'if I could only do it! If I
could, there might be hope, even for me. Lord, help me to do it! Lord,
help me!'

"After many hours of this, which I knew to be mental torment for my poor
wretched master, when he was exhausted in body and in mind, he came back
along the sands toward me. To my astonishment he knelt down beside me,
he placed his hands together, he lifted his face skyward. My master
prayed!

"'Lord of the great world,' he said, 'come to my aid or I am lost. In
Thy great mercy, save me! Hear where no man may hear, hear Thou my cry;
Thou Lord of heavenly mercy, lend me thine aid!'

"He paused, and over his face I seemed to see the dawning of a deep
peace. He rose to his feet, lifted me, and bore me down to the boat.
Then he slowly paddled away toward the center of the lake, repeating his
prayer. At last he checked the boat; then, having looked toward the sky,
he said in a low, sweet voice, 'Lord, Thou hast given me grace and
strength.' At that he lifted me high above his head----"

There was a crash as if pieces of wood were falling together and my eyes
opened with a snap. My fire had smoldered down. The Keg, heated by the
fire, had tumbled inward, and lay there in a confused heap.

"What a queer dream," I said to myself. I was really beginning to
believe that these things had happened. I rose to my feet and stepped
down to the edge of the lonely water. I am not ashamed to say that my
blood was chilled at what I saw. As I looked across the lake, within
twenty feet of where I had found the Keg, there was a boat with a man
sitting motionless in it!

When that mysterious canoe appeared on the bosom of the lonely lake, I
thought that I was looking upon a vision of a spectral nature. In spite
of all my belief that I was alone on this remote beach, there sat the
man in the boat, only a few rods off shore. He was as a mirage, as
silent as the very lake itself. A few eerie moments passed; then the
boat began to move slowly toward me, gently propelled by a skillful
paddle. As it approached, the light of the full moon streaming upon it
made it easy for me to study its occupants. Near the bow I could discern
a hound crouching. In the stern sat the paddler, his rifle across his
knees.

"Hello, the camp there!" shouted the man in the boat.

"Hello!" I called, glad enough to find that my strange visitor was no
apparition.

The canoe came ashore, I greeted the boatman, and together we walked up
toward the camp, the hound following us in a leisurely fashion. There I
replenished the fire. Then for a moment the stranger and I stood and
looked at each other. He was over six feet in height, but so
symmetrically proportioned in his physical stature that, great as it
was, he was neither awkward nor ungainly. But for the fact that his eye
had lost its earlier brightness and that his hair was sprinkled with
threads of gray, it would have been impossible to believe that he had
reached three-score years and ten, for his form was still erect, his
step elastic, and his voice clear and strong. His features were regular
and strong, giving proof of the man's self-reliant and indomitable
character. Years, perhaps a lifetime of activity in the woods and on the
lakes, had bronzed the man. From beneath heavy eyebrows looked eyes
gray in color and baffling in depth. The man's whole appearance
attracted me singularly.

"Thank ye for your welcome, mister," he began. "I shouldn't have dropped
in on ye at this onseemly hour, but the line of your smoke caught my eye
as I was turning the point yonder. I didn't expect to find a human being
on these shores. I ax your pardon for comin' in on ye, but I have
memories of this spot that made me think strange things when I saw your
camp. I am John Norton, the trapper. And who might you be, young man?"

"I am Henry Herbert," I replied; "but just call me plain Henry."

"Well, Henry," began the old trapper, "I am going to call you that. When
men meet in the woods they don't put on any airs. I have been in these
woods sixty-two years, and they have been a home for me, for my father
and mother are gone, and I have never had wife nor child of my own. And
I have heard of you, Henry. Ye be no stranger to me. For ten years back
I have heard how you like to travel the woods and the waters by
yourself, larning things that Nature does not tell about in crowds. I
have heard, too, that you be a good shot, and that you know the ways of
outwitting the trout and the pickerel. Hearing about you this way, I
knew some day that I would come across your trail; but I never thought
to run agin you to-night, for I'd no idee that mortal man knowed this
lake, save me--save me and that other. . . ."

The old man paused, seated himself on the end of a log, and gazed into
the fire with a solemn look on his face.

I did not feel like breaking in on his meditations, whatever they might
be. I was silent out of deference to his memories.

"This lake," John Norton said at length, "this lake is a strange place.
I have been here for eleven years. No other place in all this wide
country makes me feel as this place does."

Again he fell into a reverie. I, meanwhile, busied myself with supper;
and as soon as this was prepared, the two of us enjoyed it as only
woodmen can.

"If you know me," I said, "we are no strangers to each other, for I know
you. Who draws the steadiest bead with a rifle; who is the best boatman
who ever feathered paddle, and who is as honest a man as ever drew
breath?--who, but John Norton, whom I have always been wanting to meet.
No man could be as welcome to my camp."

"Well, well," laughed the old man, "when you're at home you must be one
of them detective fellows. I see we aren't no strangers to each other.
And if while in these woods old John Norton can teach you any trick of
huntin' or of fishin' or of trappin', be sure he will do so for the
welcome you have give him."

So we sat on either side of the fire, silent for a few moments. Then the
old trapper said:

"I am thinking of the things that happened here long years agone.
Strange things have come to pass on this very point. It is eleven year
this very night that me and the hound slept here, and a solemn night it
was, too. . . . God of heaven, man, what is that?"

The old man's startled ejaculation brought me to my feet as if a panther
were upon me. Glancing at the spot he had indicated by look and gesture,
I beheld only the shattered portion of the Keg. Not knowing what to make
of the trapper's excited action, I said: "That? That is only a Keg I
picked up in the lake this evening."

John Norton rose in silence to his feet and went over to where the
staves lay. One of these he picked up and held contemplatively in his
hand.

"The ways of the Lord are past the knowing of mortals," he said. "But
perhaps in the long run He brings the wrong to the right, and so makes
the evil in the world to praise him. Henry," said the Old Trapper,
looking keenly at me, "I have a mind to tell you the story of the man
who owned that Keg. A strange tale it be, but a true one, and the
teachings of it be solemn."

Eagerly I urged him to give me the story, a part of which, at least, I
felt that I already knew.

"It was eleven year agone, in this very month, that I came down the
inlet yonder into the lake. The moon was nigh her full, and everything
looked solemn and white just as it do now. Lord knows I little thought
to meet a man in these solitudes when I run agin what I am telling ye
of.

"I was paddling down this side of the lake when I heard the strangest
sounds I ever heard coming out of a bird or beast. Ye better believe,
Henry, that I sot and listened until I was nothing but ears. But nary a
thing could I make out of it. After awhile I said I would try to ambush
the creetur and find out what mouth had a language that old John Norton
couldn't understand. As I got nearer the shore, my boat just drifting in
the moonlight, I heerd a kind of crawling sound as if the brute was
a-trailing himself on the ground. The shake of a bush give me the line
on him, and I felt sure that in a minute I could let the lead drive
where it ought to go. I had my rifle to my face, when by the Lord of
marcy, Henry, I diskivered I had ambushed a man!

"And, Henry," he continued, "the words of the man was words of prayer.
Never in my life was I taken so unawares or was so unbalanced as when I
heard the voice of that man I had mistook for an animal break out in
prayer. For a minute the blood stopped in my heart and my hair moved in
my scalp; then I shook like a man with the chills. I had come that nigh
being a murderer, Henry!

"How that man prayed! He prayed for help as one calls to a comrade when
his boat has gone down under him in the rapids, and he knows he must
have help or die. This man's soul was struggling hard, I tell ye. The
words of his cry come out of his mouth like the words of one who is
surely lost unless somebody saves him. It's dreadful for a man to live
in such a way that he has to pray in that fashion; for we ought to live,
Henry, so that it is cheerful-like to meet the Lord, and pleasant to
hold converse with Him.

"I sot in my boat till his praying was done; then I hugged myself close
in under the bushes, for I heard him coming down toward the shore. And
he did come, and come close to me; and in his arms he carried something
very heavy. In a moment I heard him shove a boat out from the bushes;
then, getting in, he pushed off into the lake. He held for the center of
it; and when he had come nigh to the middle of it, he laid his paddle
down, and lifted something into the air. This he turned upside down, and
out streamed into the water something that glinted in the moonlight.
After that, he come paddling back for the shore. Myself--I kept shy of
the man that night, but the next morning I went to the stranger's camp.

"There was nothing in sight but an old ragged tent, sagging at every
seam. I called aloud so that mayhap the man would answer me. But no
answer came. I walked up to the tent and drew aside the rotten flap.
And, Henry, there lay the man senseless before me! I thought he was
dead, and I onkivered my head. But the hound here knowed better, for he
began to wag his tail. I went in, and found that the man was still
breathing. I lifted him in my arms, Henry, and bore him out of the foul
air of that tent, taking him down to the warm sunshine on the point.

"For a long while I thought he was going to die in my arms. He just lay
there lifeless-like, a-looking across the lake with eyes half-shut. But
the sun and air revived him; and after a long while he stirs and says:

"'Old man, who are you who are so kind to me?'

"I tells him I was John Norton, the trapper.

"'I am John Roberts,' he says, 'and I haven't a friend on the earth, nor
do I deserve one. Old man, you cannot understand, because you have lived
an innocent life, but I am a sinner--a wretched sinner. And my moments
here are numbered. I will tell you of my crimes; I will confess them,
for they lie heavy on my heart.

"'John Norton, I was a miser; I had a heart with a passion for gold. For
the evil love of money I turned my face away from my kind. My wife I
deserted. My only child I refused, with curses, to see, even when she
sent for me as she lay dying. John Norton, I gave all for gold. And the
more I loved it, the more I hated man. With my dreadful lust there grew
suspicion of every one. All ties of affection were severed. I lived
alone, hoarding my gold and gloating over it.

"'At last I fled from the habitations of men, bringing my gold, my god,
with me in a Keg. Here on this lonely shore I thought to be happy, far
from my own kind, far from any danger that my precious treasure be
stolen. But, John Norton--and a dying man is speaking--for all my
counting of the bright gold on the sands here, and my dancing about it
as a devil might, laughing and singing--I was unhappy. I knew that God
was watching me and was disapproving. I could not but think of my wife
and child. The thought of them began to make the gold hateful to me. Ah,
then, old man, I began to pray the Lord to deliver me! It was a bitter
struggle I fought, but at length He rescued me. He gave me strength,
John Norton, to overcome the Wicked One; He gave me strength to break
away from my sin; He gave me strength last night to pour every piece of
gold that had been for me both love and life, into the lake there. I
shall never see it more, and I am happy.'

"After that, he lay silent-like, looking up at the blue sky. Then his
eyes closed, and I thought him sleeping. But suddenly he started up, 'A
light, a light! I see a light!' Then, Henry, he sank back into my arms
and spoke no more. I hope my passing may be as peaceful as his, and my
face as calm as was his after his battle of life was over.

"The next day I buried him up yonder under them hemlocks--having no one
to help me, but doing it respectful-like, as all such should be done.
There he lies, Henry, the man who was the owner of that Keg--John
Roberts--the miser who repented before it was too late. Nor do I doubt,"
he added, in his kindly tone, "but he's been forgiven by those he
wronged."

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Words that have varied hyphenation: a-way, clean-cut, camp-fire,
east-bound, round-house.

Page 32, "Naggar" changed to "Nagger" (to find Nagger)

Page 200, "Skinney" changed to "Skinny" (Skinny soon returned)

Page 237, "Toodles" changed to "Toddles" (Toddles swung from)

Page 243, "pur" changed to "purr" (began to purr)

Page 270, "But" changed to "but" (but the face)






End of Project Gutenberg's The Boy Scouts Book of Campfire Stories, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPFIRE STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 26475.txt or 26475.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/4/7/26475/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
