The Project Gutenberg eBook, For the School Colours, by Angela Brazil,
Illustrated by Balliol Salmon


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: For the School Colours


Author: Angela Brazil



Release Date: April 26, 2011  [eBook #35972]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR THE SCHOOL COLOURS***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 35972-h.htm or 35972-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/35972/35972-h/35972-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/35972/35972-h.zip)





FOR THE SCHOOL COLOURS

       *       *       *       *       *

By ANGELA BRAZIL

    "Angela Brazil has proved her undoubted talent for writing a story of
    schoolgirls for other schoolgirls to read."--Bookman.

    The School in the South.
    Monitress Merle.
    Loyal to the School.
    A Fortunate Term.
    A Popular Schoolgirl.
    The Princess of the School.
    A Harum-Scarum Schoolgirl.
    The Head Girl at the Gables.
    A Patriotic Schoolgirl.
    For the School Colours.
    The Madcap of the School.
    The Luckiest Girl in the School.
    The Jolliest Term on Record.
    The Girls of St. Cyprian's.
    The Youngest Girl in the Fifth.
    The New Girl at St. Chad's.
    For the Sake of the School.
    The School by the Sea.
    The Leader of the Lower School.
    A Pair of Schoolgirls.
    A Fourth Form Friendship.
    The Manor House School.
    The Nicest Girl in the School.
    The Third Class at Miss Kaye's.
    The Fortunes of Philippa.

    LONDON: BLACKIE & SON, LTD., 50 OLD BAILEY, E.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: "WHAT'S THIS? WHAT HAVE THEY SENT ME?" SHE GASPED
_page 199_]


FOR THE SCHOOL COLOURS

by

ANGELA BRAZIL

Author of "A Patriotic Schoolgirl"
"The Luckiest Girl in the School"
"The Madcap of the School"
&c. &c.

Illustrated by Balliol Salmon







Blackie and Son Limited
London Glasgow and Bombay

Printed and bound in Great Britain




Contents


     CHAP.                                   Page

        I. ENTER AVELYN                         9

       II. AN INVASION                         22

      III. WALDEN                              37

       IV. AN ENCOUNTER                        51

        V. RUCTIONS                            65

       VI. REPRISALS                           79

      VII. MISS HOPKINS                        94

     VIII. SPRING-HEELED JACK                 104

       IX. CONCERNS DAY GIRLS                 120

        X. MISCHIEF                           131

       XI. MOSS COTTAGE                       145

      XII. "LADY TRACY'S AT HOME"             158

     XIII. REPORTS                            168

      XIV. WAR WORK                           178

       XV. THE SCHOOL BIRTHDAY                193

      XVI. UNDER THE PINES                    204

     XVII. THE LAVENDER LADY                  214

    XVIII. THE LOYAL SCHOOL LEAGUE            227

      XIX. THE SURPRISE TREE                  240

       XX. PAMELA'S SECRET                    254

      XXI. PAMELA'S NIGHT WALK                266

     XXII. THE LECTURE HALL IS DEDICATED      277




Illustrations


                                                                     Page

    "WHAT'S THIS? WHAT HAVE THEY SENT ME?" SHE GASPED      _Frontispiece_

    "DO YOU KNOW THIS WOOD'S PRIVATE PROPERTY?" HE SHOUTED             56

    AVELYN, CROUCHED UNDER THE MANGER, COULD HEAR THE BULLYING
      TONE IN HIS VOICE                                               152

    AN INTERVIEW WITH MISS THOMPSON                                   176

    AVELYN AND THE LAVENDER LADY                                      224

    WHO COULD SAY HOW MUCH MIGHT DEPEND ON THEIR SPEED?               272




FOR THE SCHOOL COLOURS

CHAPTER I

Enter Avelyn


"It's the limit!" exploded Laura.

"An atrocious shame!" agreed Janet.

"Gives me nerve shock!" mourned Ethelberga gloomily.

"You see," continued Laura, popping the tray of her box on to the floor
and sitting down on her bed, so as the better to address her
audience--"you see, it's been plumped upon us without any warning. Miss
Thompson must have arranged it long ago, but she never let out so much
as a teeny-weeny hint. If I'd known before I came back I'd have asked
Father to give a term's notice and let me leave at Christmas. Crystal
clear, I would."

"Rather! so would this child."

"I guess we all should."

"I call it so mean to have sprung it on us like this! I really couldn't
have believed it of Miss Thompson. She's gone down miles in my
estimation. I can never feel the same towards her again--_never!_ Those
Hawthorners! Oh, to think of it!"

"What's the matter?" asked a fourth voice, as another girl, still in hat
and coat, and carrying her travelling-bag, entered the dormitory.

"Irma! Is it you, old sport? D'you mean to say you haven't heard the
news yet?"

"Only just this minute arrived, and I've flown straight upstairs. I met
Hopscotch in the hall, and asked, 'Am I still in the Cowslip Room?' and
she nodded 'Yes,' so I didn't wait for any more. Has anything grizzly
happened? You're all looking very glum!"

"We may well look glum," said Laura tragically. "Something particularly
grizzly's happened. You remember that day school at the other side of
the town?"

"The Hawthorns--yes."

"Well, it's been given up."

Irma flung her hat on to her bed and her coat after it.

"That doesn't concern us," she remarked contemptuously.

"Doesn't it? Oh, no, of course--not in the least!" Laura's voice was
sarcastic. "It wouldn't have been any concern of ours--only, as it
happens, they've all come on here."

Irma turned round, the very picture of dismay.

"_What?_ Not _here_, surely! Great Minerva, you don't mean it! Hold me
up! I feel rocky."

Laura looked at her, and shook her head in commiseration.

"Yes, that's how it took us all when we heard," she remarked. "You'd
better sit down on your bed till you get the first shock over. It's
enough to make a camel weep. I couldn't believe it myself for a few
minutes, but it's only too true, unfortunately for us."

"The Hawthorns! Those girls whom we never spoke to--wouldn't have
touched with a pair of tongs!" gasped Irma.

"You may well marvel," sympathized Janet.

"But what's Miss Thompson _thinking_ of? Why, she always looked down so
on the Hawthorns! Wouldn't let us arrange matches with their teams, and
kept us away from them at that bazaar as if they'd been infectious. It's
been the tradition of the school to have nothing to do with them."

"Traditions have flown to the four winds. There'll be nearly fifty
Hawthorners turning up by nine o'clock to-morrow morning."

"Nearly fifty! And we were only thirty-six ourselves last term! Why, the
school will be swamped!"

"Exactly, and with day girls too. When there were twenty-four boarders
to twelve day girls, we could have things pretty well as we liked, but
if we've to hold our own against sixty or so--well!"

"It'll mean war!" finished Ethelberga, setting her mouth grimly.

"But what's possessed Miss Thompson to do such an atrocious thing?"
cried Irma in exasperation.

"_L, s. d._, my child, I suppose. Miss Perry was giving up the school,
and Tommiekins bought the connection. She's completely veered round in
her opinions. She told Adah Gartley they were nice girls, and would soon
improve immensely at Silverside. 'I hope you'll all make them welcome,'
she said to Adah."

"Welcome!" echoed Irma, Janet, and Ethelberga eloquently.

"It wouldn't have been so bad," continued Laura, "if just a few of
them--say a dozen--had been coming. We could have kept ourselves to
ourselves and quite ignored them. But we're being absolutely cuckooed
out. Do you know that our recreation room has been commandeered for an
extra class-room?"

Howls of dismay issued from the trio now seated on Irma's bed.

"Yes, you'd hardly believe it, but it is a fact," ran on Laura with
dismal volubility. "When I went to take my painting things there I found
our tables and easy chairs gone, and the whole place filled up with new
desks and a blackboard."

"Where are we going to sit in the evenings?" demanded Ethelberga
fiercely.

"Goodness only knows! In the dining-room, I suppose."

"We evidently don't count for anything with Tommiekins now," said Janet
bitterly. "The Daisy dormitory has been taken for a class-room, and an
extra bed has been put in each of the other dormitories to make up.
Didn't you notice, Irma, that there are five here now, instead of only
four?"

"Why, so there are! What a hateful cram! Who's to have the fifth?"

"I asked Hopscotch, and she said, 'A new girl.' I couldn't help flying
out at that, and she simply sat flat upon me and withered me. Told me to
go away and mind my own business, and she was coming round to inspect
the Cowslip Room in half an hour, and I'd better get on with my
unpacking."

"Oh, she will! Why didn't you tell us that before?" exclaimed the
others, bouncing up with considerable haste, and setting to work again
to empty their boxes.

"I forgot. I can think of nothing but those wretched Hawthorners. It's
made me feel weak."

"You'll feel weaker still if Hopscotch comes in and finds you with
nothing unpacked!" observed Laura sagely, stowing underclothes in her
middle drawer with the utmost rapidity. "I advise you to make some sort
of a beginning, even if you don't put things away tidily. Fling them in
anyhow, stick a blouse for a top layer, and straighten them up
afterwards. Don't let her see them still inside your box."

For a few minutes the girls suspended talk for work. Laura's flaxen head
vibrated between box and wardrobe. Janet arranged her dressing-table and
replaited her dark pigtail. Ethelberga hung up a selection of
photographs, and placed her nightdress inside its case; Irma spread her
bed with her possessions, preparatory to filling her drawers, and
comforted her ruffled feelings with the last pear-drop in the paper bag
she had brought with her.

The dormitory was of fair size, and though the girls might grumble,
contained ample space for the fifth bed. It was a pretty room with a
yellow wall-paper, and chintz curtains with little bunches of cowslips
on them. There were pictures of cowslips also on the walls, and all the
pin-cushions and hair-tidies had yellow ribbons. The window looked over
the garden, and behind the belt of trees that bordered the lawn gleamed
the grey waters of the estuary, where ships were stealing out from port
into the dangers of the great waters. The girls prided themselves upon
this view, though at the present moment they were too busy to think of
it. Three years' previous experience had taught them that, when Miss
Hopkins made a tour of inspection on the first afternoon of term, she
meant business, and woe betide the luckless slacker who had gossiped and
dawdled instead of bestowing her property in her own lawful drawers. If
she had announced her intention of visiting them shortly, she might
certainly be trusted to keep her word.

Their expectations were not mistaken, for before the half-hour had
expired the door opened, revealing the short stout figure and rather
angular features of the second mistress. The girls jumped up and stood
obediently at attention, ready to go through the usual routine of
dormitory superintendence. Miss Hopkins, however, was not alone. In her
wake followed a girl of fifteen, whom she bustled in, in a hurry.

"This is your dormitory, Avelyn--the Cowslip Room, we call it. Here's
your bed, and these are your dress hooks and your drawers. The janitor's
bringing your box upstairs. Oh, he's here now! Put it at the end of the
bed, Tom, please. I suppose you have the key, Avelyn? Then you'd better
unlock it at once. These are your room-mates--Laura Talbot, Irma Ridley,
Janet Duncan, and Ethelberga Carnforth. Girls, this is Avelyn Watson. I
hope you will make her welcome. Begin your unpacking now, Avelyn. I
shall be back directly to see how you are getting on."

Miss Hopkins, whose duties on the first day of term were multifarious,
withdrew as hurriedly as she had entered. Her visits generally resembled
the brief career of a whirlwind--sometimes her pupils considered that
they carried equal desolation.

The new girl remained standing by the bed, and for the moment made no
effort to obey orders and unlock her box. She was pretty--her four
critics decided that point at their first glance--her chin was softly
rounded, and her nose was small and straight. Her general colouring was
brunette, but the big wide-open eyes were grey as the estuary outside.
She flushed vivid pink under the scrutiny of her room-mates. For a brief
instant they thought she was going to cry, then she winked rapidly and
began to whistle instead.

"I shouldn't advise you to whistle too loud," counselled Janet, by way
of breaking the ice.

"Miss Hopkins is only in the next dormitory, and she's got a crusade on
against whistling--at least she had last term, and I don't suppose she's
changed her tactics; she doesn't generally."

"Do the eternal snows change?" murmured Ethelberga.

The new girl stopped with her mouth puckered into a button. A look of
consternation spread over her face, then passed into a smile.

"I was told I'd have to be jolly careful and mind my p's and q's here!"
she remarked cheerily. "I've been just five minutes in the school, and
my first impressions are that Miss Thompson aims at unadulterated
dignity, and that Miss Hopkins is concentrated essence of fuss. Am I
near?"

"Not so far off!" laughed Laura. "They can exchange characters
sometimes, though. I've seen Miss Hopkins ride her high horse and be
dignity personified, and on the other hand I've seen Miss Thompson more
ruffled than a head mistress has any business to be. You'll soon get to
know them."

"I suppose I shall. Whether I shall altogether like them is another
question."

"You'll like Silverside!" gushed Irma. "It's a perfectly delightful
school--at least it used to be. We're afraid it is going to be utterly
and entirely spoilt now."

"Why?"

"Because it's being invaded. It used to be quite small and select, more
boarders than day girls, you know. And now we've just had a horrible
shock--the whole of another day school is being plumped upon us--a
school we've always despised. We're too indignant for words."

Avelyn, who was fumbling with the lock of her box, lifted her head.

"Don't you like them coming?"

"Like them! Sophonisba! How can you ask such a question? We've always
looked down on them so fearfully. Why, if we met any of them in the
street, we used just to stare straight through them, as if they didn't
exist. They wore dark-blue coats and horrid stiff sailor hats with
coloured bands, for all the world like an institution. I tell you we
simply wouldn't have touched them."

"You'll have to know them now."

"To a certain extent, worse luck! But they needn't think we'll be
friendly with them, for we shan't. We shall keep a strict line drawn."

Avelyn had lifted the tray of her box on to the floor, and was busy
taking books from the bottom portion. She was too intent on her
occupation to reply. Irma, whose writing pad and fountain pen had just
come to hand, was hastily scribbling a letter home; Ethelberga, leaning
out of the window, exchanged greetings with a schoolmate in the garden
below; Janet's vision was focused on her drawers; and Laura had just
come across the postcard album, which she was afraid she had forgotten
to pack, and was rejoicing in its possession. For five minutes or so the
girls were engrossed with their own affairs, then the attention of the
room was concentrated again on Avelyn.

"You haven't told us yet where you live," said Laura, looking up
suddenly from the contemplation of post cards.

"My home is at Lyngates just now."

"Where's Lyngates?"

"About twenty miles from here."

"You say 'just now'. Haven't you lived there long?"

"Only since last spring."

"You've brought very few clothes and things with you," commented Irma,
who had been watching the unpacking of the new girl's box with critical
eyes. "You'll never get through a term on those, I should say."

"There isn't any need to bring so many things when I'm going home for
the week-ends."

"For the week-ends? Heavens! You don't mean to say you're a weekly
boarder?"

"Why not?"

An expression of deep consternation spread over the faces of Avelyn's
four room-mates. Their disapproval was evident, and they voiced their
objections.

"We've never had such a thing as a weekly boarder before!"

"You'll be away all Saturdays and Sundays!"

"You'll be out of all the fun!"

"Almost as bad as being a day girl!"

"Miss Thompson said once that she didn't approve of weekly boarders."

"I can't understand Tommiekins, she's changed so lately."

"Have you ever been to school before?"

"Why, yes," replied Avelyn, smoothing out the folds of her evening
dress, and hanging it on the hooks behind the curtain. "Though not since
last Christmas."

"To boarding school?"

"No; it was a day school."

"Where?"

"I went to The Hawthorns in Harlingden."

If a bomb had fallen in the dormitory it could not have caused a greater
upheaval. For a moment the girls stared at Avelyn as if scarcely
crediting her statement.

"Do you mean to say you're one of those wretched Hawthorners?" exploded
Janet at last.

"I used to be, but I suppose I'm a Silversider now."

"And we've got you in our dormitory!" gasped Laura.

"So it seems."

"Miss Thompson ought to be thoroughly ashamed of herself!" fluttered
Ethelberga.

"You'll be rid of me on Saturday and Sunday, remember," returned Avelyn
bitterly.

At this crisis, the clamour of the gong for tea fortunately put an end
to an extremely embarrassing situation. The four room-mates fled,
leaving their new companion to follow them to the dining-room as best
she could. When she entered, they were already seated at table, and did
not look in her direction. She took a seat next to a complete stranger,
who indeed handed her the bread and butter, but vouchsafed no single
word of conversation.

When the meal was over, the original inmates of the Cowslip Room retired
to a secluded portion of the garden, and held an indignation meeting.
For the first frenzied five minutes they allowed their wrath full swing,
and vibrated between a dormitory strike and writing to their parents to
beg for instant removal from the school. Then reason reasserted itself,
and decided the impracticability of both methods. Previous experience
had shown them that their head mistress was a tough dragon to tackle,
and scarcely likely to be coerced by even the best organized dormitory
strike, while in her heart of hearts each knew that, after paying her
term's fees in advance, her father would need some very solid cause of
complaint to justify so extreme a measure as a return to the bosom of
the family. They began to discuss the matter more sanely.

"The fact is, she's here, and I suppose we can't get rid of her,"
admitted Irma.

"After all, she's a boarder!" ventured Ethelberga.

"Only a weekly one," qualified Janet.

"And a Hawthorner!" added Laura.

"She said she hadn't been to school since last Christmas," commented
Ethelberga.

"Why, so she did! Then she's had a sort of a break from The Hawthorns,
and in a way she's making a fresh start here."

"I suppose so."

"If she'd be loyal to Silverside, though we could never like her, we
might bring ourselves to tolerate her."

"A boarder's a boarder!"

When the girls returned to the Cowslip Room, they found their new
companion with emptied box putting the last of her possessions into her
drawers.

"Look here, Avelyn Watson," said Laura. "We've been talking you over.
Although you go home for the week end, you're still a boarder, and at
Silverside boarders are a very different thing from day girls, as you'll
soon find out. If you've had two whole terms away from those
Hawthorners, just forget them, and consider yourself entirely one of us.
If you do that, we'll count you on our side; but if you've anything to
do with day girls, we'll cut you dead."

"I don't quite understand," returned Avelyn.

"You soon will!" said Janet significantly.

"I advise you to think it over," added Laura.




CHAPTER II

An Invasion


The changes which were taking place this term at Silverside certainly
marked a new era in its traditions. Up till now it had been essentially
a boarding school. There had, indeed, been day girls, who had shared the
classes and some of the games, but they were in the minority, both in
numbers and in influence. They had had no part in the various guilds and
societies, and had been made by the boarders to feel that they were
inferior beings who did not count. The mistresses, themselves resident,
had been accustomed to view the boarders as the more important factors,
and arranged everything to suit their convenience. It had been the
unwritten code of the school that to be a boarder meant to procure
preferential treatment.

Miss Thompson, however, was a level-headed woman, who marched with the
times. When the opportunity arose of acquiring the connection of The
Hawthorns, the large day school at the other side of the town, she
closed with the bargain, and decided upon an entire change of tactics.
Henceforward Silverside was to be run as _the_ girls' day school of
Harlingden. The house was large, its accommodation had hitherto exceeded
the needs of the pupils, there was plenty of room for added numbers, and
even in war-time it would be possible to run up a corrugated iron or
portable wooden building to serve as lecture hall and gymnasium. The big
garden already contained several tennis courts, and there was a field
close at hand which might be rented for hockey. Altogether, Miss
Thompson congratulated herself that she had performed a most excellent
stroke of business, and she looked forward to establishing a very
flourishing educational centre, and to laying by a comfortable provision
upon which she might retire when the burden of teaching grew too heavy
for her to bear.

Certainly, Silverside was most excellently situated for the purpose she
had in view. The property had been bought some years before the town of
Harlingden had expanded, and while land was still cheap. The house stood
in its own beautiful grounds, on the top of a hill commanding a fine
view over the estuary. It was breezy and healthy, with large lofty
rooms, big windows, and ample accommodation in the way of side doors and
bathrooms: just sufficiently in the country to allow of walks through
fields and woods, yet near enough to the town to permit most girls to
return home for their mid-day dinners. As a day school, it was far more
conveniently situated than The Hawthorns. Harlingden, formerly a
moderate-sized and not particularly important town, had since the
outbreak of the war been turned into a great munition centre; the
Government, attracted by the advantages of the estuary, had established
large permanent works there, together with a shipbuilding industry. In a
few short years the population had doubled. Fresh suburbs sprang up like
mushrooms. In the Silverside district this was particularly noticeable,
for where formerly there had been quite a rural walk between hedges,
leading to the town, there now stood rows of neat villas with stuccoed
fronts and balconies, and conspicuously new gardens.

The boarders at Silverside, who preferred country to town, greatly
deplored this suburban growth. They had always begged to take their
walks in an opposite direction, and had ignored Harlingden and its
industries as persistently as possible. The advent of about fifty day
girls into Silverside they regarded as neither more nor less than an
alien invasion. They sat together in a tight clump when school opened at
nine o'clock on Wednesday morning. Until the new gymnasium could be
erected, it was difficult to find a room large enough to accommodate
everybody. The old drawing-room had been emptied of furniture and fitted
with forms, and here, by sitting very close, the girls managed to cram
themselves in for the opening ceremony. Miss Thompson, elated at heart,
but more stately and dignified than ever in manner, addressed her pupils
in a short speech.

"As Silverside is entering on a new chapter of its career," she began,
"I should like to put before you all, as briefly as possible, what I
consider to be the ideals of the school. Those who have been here some
years already know our traditions, but it will do them no harm to hear
them again, and those of you who are new will, I hope, understand, and
be prepared to accept them with equal readiness.

"First of all, we stand for Work. We are living in very strenuous times,
and it is the duty of all who love their country to do their best. Every
faithful struggle with your lessons here makes you more fit to help your
country by and by. If you have no ambition for yourselves, remember that
you are part of a great nation, and as such you must not slack, but do
your bit to raise the general standard of education. You'll find there's
a joy and a satisfaction in mastering rules of arithmetic or irregular
verbs, when you feel that you are doing it not only for yourselves but
for the general good. Then there are certain other things for which
Silverside has always stood--truth and straightforward dealings, and a
spirit of unity and of loyalty to the school. We have striven to
establish a high tone here, and at all costs let us preserve it.

"This term there is a very large proportion of new girls, and hence a
big opportunity for everybody. There will be inevitable changes, and
much pioneer work to be done, and each girl may find a chance of taking
a share in consolidating our traditions. I trust that old and new will
join hands and do their utmost to work together harmoniously for the
good of the school, and the influence which, through you, it may
exercise on the community later on."

At the end of Miss Thompson's speech the girls separated, and went to
their class-rooms. At the eleven o'clock "break" they poured into the
garden. They stood about in little groups, eating packets of lunch, and
talking. Adah Gartley, Isobel Norris, and Joyce Edwards, the three
eldest boarders, kept together. To them presently advanced two of the
invaders, a ruddy-haired girl of perhaps seventeen, and a stout,
dark-eyed girl a trifle younger.

"Our names are Annie Broadside and Gladys Wilks," began
she-of-the-chestnut-locks. "If we'd stayed on at The Hawthorns, one or
other of us would have been head this term. You look about the oldest of
the old lot here, so perhaps you'll tell us how this school's managed.
Do you have monitresses, or prefects, or what? Miss Thompson didn't
mention a word about that in her speech. We'd like to know."

Adah glanced at her rather superciliously.

"We've never had anything of the sort here," she replied.

Annie Broadside's eyes grew round with amazement.

"What? No prefects or monitresses? How in the world did you manage,
then?"

"We didn't find them necessary," maintained Adah stiffly.

Gladys Wilks whistled, and looked eloquently at her friend.

"Of course it was a very small school," she remarked, "so I dare say you
somehow muddled on; but _now_--surely there'll have to be something of
the sort instituted?"

"Those juniors will give trouble if there's no one to tackle them,"
added Annie. "Just look at them over there!"

The juveniles in question were certainly behaving with a lack of decorum
entirely foreign to the former atmosphere of Silverside. They were, in
fact, engaged in jumping over Miss Thompson's most cherished flower
beds, with disastrous consequences to the pet geraniums and
calceolarias.

"The little hooligans!" exclaimed Adah, rushing to the rescue of the
unfortunate flowers. "Here, get away, you kiddies! this sort of
performance isn't allowed. Stop, this minute!"

The five long-legged children who were making a display of their jumping
agility called a temporary halt, and stared aggressively at Adah.

"Who says it's not allowed?" enquired a pert ten-year-old, who was
evidently the ringleader.

"_I_ do."

"Are you a teacher?"

"No."

"A prefect or a monitress?"

"No."

"Then, what are you?"

"I'm a boarder," announced Adah with dignity.

The junior sniggered rudely.

"Boarders have no right to interfere with us, that I can see. We'll do
as we like. Come along, girls, follow the leader!" and, turning, she
made a long leap across the bed, landing in the edging of blue lobelias.

Adah stood by, raging and impotent. She would have interfered by force,
but very fortunately at that moment the school bell rang, and the
irrepressible juniors desisted from their occupation and raced one
another to the side door. Adah followed thoughtfully. Her brain was a
whirlpool of new impressions, most of them not at all favourable, and
she had not yet had time to assort them and put them into mental
pigeon-holes. One idea loomed large. Silverside was going to be an
utterly different place from what it had been before. That brief tussle
had revealed much. Hitherto the little girls had been well-behaved
children, rather in awe of their elders, and easily held in check; these
new juniors seemed a different generation, and a very perverse and
untoward one.

Everything, indeed, was changed. Her form room overflowed with
strangers, and there was a new mistress, whose methods were different
from those of Miss Hopkins. Adah, mindful of her position as oldest
pupil, did the honours of the school, showing teacher and girls where
books, exercise paper, and other necessaries were kept, but she
performed this charity more in the spirit of _noblesse oblige_ than with
any goodwill.

When the last of the day girls had taken her departure after four
o'clock, Adah heaved an immense sigh of relief, and sent a scout round
to call a boarders' meeting for 5.15 prompt.

Immediately after tea, therefore, all the resident pupils of Silverside
assembled in the summer-house at the bottom of the garden. They had
chosen that spot because it was secluded, and they were not likely to be
disturbed. Their consultations were to be of a private nature, and they
did not wish any mistress to overhear them. The summer-house was not
very large--much too small, in fact, to contain twenty-four girls--but
some squatted on the steps, and some on the window-sills, and some
overflowed on to the lawn. Adah, seated on the little rustic table,
looked round to see that her full audience was assembled, and opened the
proceedings in a voice that trembled with indignation.

"It seems to me, and I expect to most of you, that matters here have
just about come to a crisis. The school's turned topsy-turvy. It's been
invaded by this horde of day girls, and everything is altogether
different. Now, Silverside has always existed for the boarders. Miss
Thompson has recognized that, and we've had a great many special
privileges. It's _we_ who have set the tone of the school, and made
Silverside what it is. As long as we outnumbered the day girls that was
pretty easy, but, now that this huge flock has trooped in, it may be a
difficult matter to cope with them. We must make up our minds what we
intend to do. Has anybody any suggestion to offer?"

"I thought of writing to my father, and asking him to take me away at
Christmas," propounded Irma, flushing with nervousness at the sound of
her own voice.

Adah gazed at her with an expression of mingled amazement and sorrow.

"Irma Ridley, I shouldn't have expected this from _you_! Leave the
school, indeed! Where's your loyalty? I hope you haven't been spreading
such an abominable notion. No, indeed! We Silversiders mustn't desert
the old ship. We've got to stick to her, and steer her course for her
through very troubled waters. Don't let anyone suggest ratting again."

Irma, covered with confusion, blushed yet more furiously. The sentiment
of the meeting was against her, and she felt that she had blundered
badly. She murmured an incoherent apology, and began nervously tying
knots in her pocket-handkerchief.

"Surely someone has a better suggestion to offer than this?" said Adah,
her clear blue eyes searching the faces of her companions. "Please don't
be afraid of airing your opinions."

"Silverside must stick to its traditions," ventured Joyce Edwards. "We
mustn't let everything be swamped by the invasion."

"Let's make a Boarders' League," proposed Isobel Norris, "and pledge
ourselves to hold together and support one another--a kind of Blood
Brotherhood, you know."

"The very thing!" agreed everybody.

The idea was so manifestly satisfactory that each girl wondered why it
had not occurred to herself to suggest it. To bind themselves in so
close a bond of union seemed picturesque and romantic in the extreme. It
appealed to their imaginations tremendously.

"We shall be fighting for the school colours!" said Adah, with a light
of enthusiasm shining in her blue eyes. "It's _we_, the little band of
old pupils, who are to preserve the ideals of the school. These new
girls must be made to realize that they're at Silverside now, and not at
The Hawthorns."

"I guess we'll rub it into them," murmured Laura Talbot to the
still-confused Irma.

It was a new girl after all, however, who made the really practical
suggestion of the meeting. Avelyn Watson had sat very quietly during the
proceedings, feeling herself in a somewhat awkward position. She had
been a pupil at The Hawthorns for two years, but her mother had never
really liked the school, and had removed her from it the preceding
Christmas. Avelyn had come to Silverside quite ready to embrace its
traditions and to erase The Hawthorns from her memory. To be confronted
with more than fifty of her old schoolfellows, some of whom had to-day
claimed affectionate intimacy with her, had been somewhat of a shock.
She did not quite know where she stood. She was not sure whether the
boarders were disposed to receive her into the bosom of the League, or
if they would regard her as among the aliens. One fact, culled from
former experience, rose to her lips. She was too shy to state it
publicly, but she bent towards Laura Talbot and whispered:

"Tell them, if they want to do anything, they ought to have
prefects--you see, I _know_!"

Laura immediately broached the suggestion as her own, and gained the
whole credit for it. The idea, hinted at by Annie Broadside and Gladys
Wilks in the morning, had been fermenting in Adah's brain all day, and
she grasped at it eagerly.

"It would give us just the authority we want," she agreed. "We'd better
make a deputation and speak to Miss Thompson about it. Who'll go with
me?"

The Principal, busy and burdened with a hundred new cares, sat in her
study that evening answering letters from parents. She pushed away her
papers rather wearily as the deputation, consisting of Adah Gartley,
Isobel Norris, Consie Arkwright, and Joyce Edwards, entered the room
with a kind of bashful assurance. She was tired, but she was always
ready to listen to what her girls had to say. It had been her invariable
rule to meet them half-way. She heard them now patiently, asking many
questions, for they were shy in stating their case, and did not at first
explain their objects lucidly. When at length she had got at the gist of
the matter, she leaned back in her chair and thought for a moment or two
before she replied.

"What you say is very true. The influx of another school into
Silverside may certainly endanger our old traditions. I look to you
boarders, who have been with me for years, to uphold every principle for
which we have hitherto stood. I agree that you might find your task very
difficult unless you were armed with some authority. We have never had
school officers before, but that was because we did not feel them a
necessity. I will try the experiment and see how it answers. You four
are among my oldest pupils. You know what Silverside has stood for in
the past, and you shall help to mould its future. I appoint you
prefects, and give you power to report to me, or to any other mistress,
breaches of discipline which come under your notice, and in certain
cases to take off order marks. Adah, who is the eldest, and was first in
last term's examination list, shall be head girl. I will announce this
at nine o'clock to-morrow. My great object is to amalgamate the two
schools into one as quickly as possible, and I trust that you will not
show any favouritism towards old girls, but will give the new ones equal
justice."

"We'll do our best, Miss Thompson," declared Adah, Isobel, Consie, and
Joyce in an obedient chorus.

And doubtless they really meant to do their best; but schoolgirls are
prejudiced beings, and apt to be conservative to the core. They had
decided beforehand that the former pupils of Silverside, and the
boarders in particular, had the sole prerogative of high ideals,
culture, and gentility, and that such refinements could not, and did
not, exist among those who had come from The Hawthorns. In their minds
the division was as complete as that between the sheep and the goats.
They looked upon the Hawthorners as heathen, and upon themselves in the
light of missionaries. They set to work very patronizingly to make their
influence felt. Now, there is nothing which most people resent so much
as patronage. The Hawthorners had been happy enough in their old school,
and they were keenly insulted at being given to understand that they
were regarded by the Silversiders as inferiors. They held indignation
meetings of their own on the subject.

"Why should those stuck-up things lord it over us?" exploded Annie
Broadside.

"They're not as clever as we are. We beat them easily in class," added
Gladys Wilks.

"I should just think we do. They're simply not in the running at
maths.," declared Gertrude Howells.

"And yet they're prefects, if you please."

"At The Hawthorns prefects were always chosen from those who got the
highest marks in the examinations."

"You were top last term, Annie, and would have been head girl if the
school had gone on."

"You were only two marks behind me, Gladys, and you know Miss Perry
hadn't counted the botany papers. It was really a toss-up between us."

"Well, we're both out of it now."

"Very much so."

"I don't call it fair that these four boarders should have all the
authority."

"It isn't!"

"If they think we're going to knuckle under to them they're very much
mistaken."

"Giving themselves such airs about being old Silversiders, and treating
us like inferiors!"

"Can't we do anything?"

"Let's form an 'Old Hawthorners' Guild', and vow to stick to one
another. There are more of us than of them, and we'll beat them in
lessons and at games, and let them see who's inferior."

"Right you are! You shall be captain, Annie."

"Then you shall be secretary, Gladys."

"I know everybody will be only too delighted to join."

"They will. But don't let those Silversiders know one single word about
it."

"They shan't, indeed!"

"We're here, and the school is as much ours as theirs!"

"Our old set will follow us, and not care a toss about the prefects!"

Adah and her fellow-officers had indeed made a terrible mistake by their
superior and patronizing ways. Instead of welding the school into one,
as Miss Thompson had hoped and intended, they had entirely alienated the
new element and had set up a most unhappy barrier of division.
Silverside resolved itself into two parties, each apparently determined
to misunderstand the other, and obstinately resolute not to mix. Miss
Thompson, anxiously watching the result of her experiment, saw only the
surface of things, for most of the trouble lay below, deeper than the
ken of head mistresses. The teachers were aware of an undercurrent of
discontent, but could not absolutely discover the reason. Only the girls
themselves knew that the school was split into rival factions, between
whom there was going to be war.




CHAPTER III

Walden


As Avelyn Watson is one of the central figures of this story, it will be
well to go back some months, and follow the events which preceded her
appearance at Silverside. Though apparently trivial enough, they are
important, because if they had not happened, she would have come to
school as a day girl instead of a boarder, and the part which fate put
into her hands to play could never have been acted.

It all began with Daphne forgetting to change her wet stockings. Daphne
had done many imprudent things before, and had suffered more or less
from them. This time Dame Nature, tired of having her laws flouted,
determined to teach her a lesson. The specialist who was called in to
consult with the family doctor made an exhaustive examination of the
case, then pronounced his verdict.

"She mustn't live in the town. If you want her to grow up into healthy
womanhood, a year or two in the country is an imperative necessity."

Up to the time when Sir Basil Hunter delivered this ultimatum, the
Watsons had always lived in Harlingden. Daphne and Avelyn could
remember the old days when Daddy had been alive, and Mother's hair had
been brown and not grey; and she had laughed as gaily and easily as they
did now. That was many years ago, and to David and Anthony, at any rate,
their father was little more than an enlarged photograph on the
dining-room wall. They had all been born in the comfortable, commonplace
house in Gerrard Square, and had taken it and its uninteresting view,
and its smoky little garden, together with the round of town life,
entirely for granted. Then the change came. Mrs. Watson, thoroughly
alarmed at the doctor's diagnosis, and nervous over the health of her
whole family, took immediate steps to carry out his advice. She let the
house in Gerrard Square, and removed into the country. The place she
selected was a tiny village named Lyngates, two miles from the station
at Netherton, and twenty miles away from Harlingden. Its pure air,
gravel soil, and record of sunshine were exactly what Daphne required;
the boys could go in to town every day by train, and thus continue at
King James's School, and Avelyn, who was sufficiently like Daphne to
make the fatigue of a daily train journey seem a risky experiment, could
be sent as a weekly boarder to Silverside.

By a most fortunate chance, Mrs. Watson came across the very little
property she wanted. It was an old farm-house, with a few outbuildings
at the back, and a field or two for poultry--the doctor had suggested
that Daphne should interest herself in poultry. It was smaller by far
than No. 7 Gerrard Square, but big enough for their requirements.

"With present war prices, and income-tax what it is, and four children
to educate, I consider I'm very wise to make the move," she decided,
"though I should never have had the courage to do it if Sir Basil Hunter
hadn't been so emphatic."

So the house, gardens, outbuildings, and fields that composed the small
holding were bought and paid for, and formally transferred by deed from
their former owner, George Hethersedge, yeoman, to the possession of
Helena Watson, widow, and the bargain was complete. That it was a
bargain the children had no doubt. So many extra things were included
that were never even mentioned in the title-deeds--the thrushes and
blackbirds and tits in the garden, the wagtails that flitted up and down
the little stream, the owls that sat and hooted in the elm tree at dusk,
the wild bees' nest in the bank, the ferns in the crannies of the old
wall, the morning view when the sun shone over the valley, and the calm,
quiet sunsets when the sky was aflame with rose and violet. It was the
most exciting experience to explore their new kingdom. They were always
making fresh discoveries. Up till now, beyond their annual summer
holiday at some seaside resort, they had had no practical knowledge of
the country. To live side by side with Nature was like being transferred
into another world.

To Mrs. Watson, no less than to her children, the change was welcome.
She had often pored over Nature books from the library, and they had
been wont to stir in her a vague yearning to get away from bricks and
mortar and chimneys, and spend a sylvan year somewhere far from the
sound of trams or steam hooters. She chafed sometimes against the
monotony of her daily shopping and household cares. She longed for lanes
and woods, but there seldom seemed time to go for walks at Harlingden;
it was a long way from Gerrard Square into the fields. We are such
creatures of habit, that it had never struck her to uproot herself and
reorder the lives of herself and her children; and if Daphne had not
forgotten her galoshes, and thus brought about the visit of Sir Basil
Hunter, the family might have remained town birds to the end of the
chapter. As it was, they stepped into a fresh inheritance. They named
the house "Walden", after Thoreau's famous _Walden_, a book which her
mother loved, and which Avelyn was just beginning to read and
appreciate; the magic of its radiant love of Nature, and the breadth of
its philosophy appealed to her strongly.

Though the Watsons' Walden was quite unpretentious, it was certainly
more comfortable than the shanty in Concord, Massachusetts, where Henry
David Thoreau spent his immortal two years and two months. There was a
sitting-room on each side of the little hall, a big kitchen and pantry
behind, and four bedrooms upstairs. Outside, across the yard, was a
cottage, with a lower room which could be used as a den for fretwork,
painting, carpentering, or the pursuit of any other cherished hobbies,
and an upper storey containing two extra bedrooms for emergencies. The
stable and barn were interesting, and held dim, cobwebby recesses, where
bats hung head downwards, and a brown owl sometimes perched blinking
upon the cross-beams.

In front was a small raised garden, bordered by a very wide ivy-covered
stone wall. The house stood on the slope of a steep hill, so that this
wall overtopped the road below like a crag. When you leaned your arms on
its golden sweet-scented ivy blossom, or sombre berries and smooth
leaves, you could look out over a tract of country that spread for
miles--green meadows, hazel copses bursting into leaf, thick woods that
hid the stream whose rushing waters yet made themselves heard, the reedy
reaches of a river, and fir-clad hills that melted faint and blue into a
misty horizon. There was a patch of gravel in front of the wall, and a
rustic garden seat, dilapidated, but firm enough for occupation. The
site made a natural outdoor parlour: a yew tree, grown slantwise with
the prevailing wind, formed an umbrella overhead. At the side of the
cottage, between the yard and the kitchen garden, purled a shallow
little brook, at the edge of which grew watercresses and marsh
marigolds. It was spanned by a bridge made of rough slabs of stone.
Beyond the stables lay a couple of small meadows, containing an upper
reach of the stream, and a little marshy tract interspersed with gorse
and alder bushes.

The Watson family had reviewed the whole premises slowly, critically,
and with unbounded satisfaction.

"It's the sort of place you read about in a novel," sighed Daphne, whose
tastes were romantic. "Somehow you feel as if anything could happen
here--interesting things, I mean. Mysteries and tragedies, and--and
even----"

"Love affairs!" finished Avelyn promptly. "Perhaps they may--sometime."

Avelyn was at the stage when life is full of dreams. It was her constant
amusement to imagine all kinds of delightful but wildly improbable
future happenings for Daphne, for herself, and for the boys. The number
of castles in the air which she constructed would have built a city.
They were all shadowy and unsubstantial, but none the less fascinating
for that. Walden appeared to her, as to Daphne, an appropriate setting
for golden visions.

David and Anthony, still in the age of blunt uncompromising frankness,
regarded the new home from a practical standpoint.

"It's top-hole!" decided David. "I'll have a thingumjig--what d'you call
it?--lathe, I mean, inside that cottage, and a joiner's bench. There's a
man in the village who says he's got one to sell cheap, and a vice with
it. I'm going to make a rabbit hutch, and all sorts of things."

"There are trout in that part of the stream up the field," beamed
Anthony. "Not very big ones, but certainly trout. I saw them jump. The
boy who brought the telegram yesterday told me that he catches them
with his hands. He knows of sixteen birds' nests on the road to the
station, and he's got a young hedgehog at home. I'm going to just sit
and sit in the field when it's getting dark till I see one for myself."

"I shall grow ten years younger when I've had a summer here," announced
Mrs. Watson to her flock. "You won't know your poor old mother very
soon. The country air's making her so frisky and juvenile, she wants to
run about like a girl!"

"_Do_, Muvvie darling! We love you in your skittish moods," implored
Avelyn. "When you wear that short skirt and that rush hat you don't look
a day older than Auntie Belle--truly! You never climbed up step ladders
in Gerrard Square!"

"I've begun to do many things I never did before," laughed Mrs. Watson,
"partly from necessity. If I could have found anybody else to go up the
step ladder, perhaps I shouldn't have tried. We've all got to work if we
want to make the place look nice. It'll be worth it when we've
finished."

Walden had been empty for two years before its owner sold it, and,
though it was in a fair state of repair as regarded masonry and
woodwork, it sadly needed decorating. The question of its repapering
and painting had been the one hitch in the proceedings, for, when Mrs.
Watson had sought to obtain estimates for its renovation, she found
that, in the present war-time shortage of workmen, no firm would
undertake to carry out a job so far in the country. For three horrible
days matters had seemed at a dead-lock, and the purchase of Walden (not
quite concluded) had trembled in the balance. But Daphne's white cheeks
brought all Mrs. Watson's native obstinacy to the fore. She was
determined not to be vanquished. She enquired in the village, and
secured the services of an old soldier who used to be handy-man at the
Vicarage, and with his experienced aid and the willing, though unskilled
hands of her young flock, she determined to do up Walden herself. She
secured lodgings for a few weeks at a farm close by, and the family
devoted the Easter holidays to the purpose. It was a new experience for
them, and they enjoyed it thoroughly. Armed with pails of distemper and
whitewash brushes, they splashed away at the walls, painted woodwork,
stained floors, or laid linoleum. They made a delightful discovery in
the dining-room, for, when they came to tear down the old wall paper,
they found an overmantel of ancient oak beams. The fireplace was large
and old-fashioned, with ingle nooks on either side, the woodwork had
been completely covered with paper and plaster, but when this was
cleared away, and it was cleaned, stained, and varnished, it presented a
most quaint and handsome appearance. The great beam that spanned the
hearth had a flat surface, and on this Mrs. Watson decided to carve a
motto. The family put their heads together over it for many days. They
looked up mottoes in books, and consulted their friends, but could not
find exactly the right one. Daphne and Avelyn were in favour of English,
but Mrs. Watson and the boys plumped for Latin, and finally evolved the
following:--

    POST LABOREM HAEC REQUIES HAEC FELICITAS.
    (After work, here is rest and happiness.)

"When you've finished your lessons in the evenings, we can make a circle
round the fire and talk about the day's doings; and it will seem a
centre for the whole house and for our lives," said Mrs. Watson. "I
believe this little home is going to be far more precious to us than
Gerrard Square."

To the children the doing up of the establishment was the utmost fun.
Thoreau himself could not have obtained more enjoyment from his "Walden"
than they did from theirs. There were many humorous incidents; as when
Anthony sat down in the colour wash pail, or when Daphne dropped a pot
of pink paint on the top of David's head, or when Avelyn poured in
paraffin by mistake, instead of methylated spirit, to thin the varnish.
It was a proud day when at last colour wash and paint were dry, and the
floor was swept and cleaned, and the vans arrived and the furniture was
carried in. Mrs. Watson had sold most of the heavy possessions which
they owned in Gerrard Square, and had bought in their place tasteful
antiques which suited the house far better, and gave it an air of quaint
culture and comfort. When all was arranged it looked a charming little
abode, and thoroughly in harmony, from the black beams of its ingle nook
to the carved settle and gate-legged oak table, or the framed samplers
on its walls.

Many surprising incidents happened in the first days of occupation. Very
early one morning, as Daphne and Avelyn lay in bed, they were awakened
by a tweeting and whirr of wings, and found that a pair of newly-arrived
swallows had flown in through the open window, and were whirling
overhead, evidently with designs on the big cross beam for nesting
purposes. The sight of the girls, who sat up in bed, seemed to annoy
them, for they twittered with anger, scintillated rapidly round the
room, then flashed out through the window into the spring sunshine.

"Well," exclaimed Daphne, "this certainly is living in the country!
Actually swallows in our bedroom!"

"The poor darlings!" declared Avelyn. "They've had a horrible
disappointment. They'd made up their minds to have their nest on that
beam. I remember Martin Jones pulled down a swallow's nest before he
whitewashed, and said they had built there last year, and had got in
because the window was broken. They must think we're dreadful intruders.
They were scolding us as hard as they could in bird language."

"Shall we hang out a notice: 'To Let, Eligible Quarters for Swallows'?"
laughed Daphne. "We might even put nesting boxes round the walls, and
extend the invitation to other birds."

To anyone who wished to study natural history, Walden certainly offered
advantages. There was a friendly robin that domesticated itself, and
would fly into the dining-room at meal times, hop on to the table, and
even perch upon the loaf. He would haunt the kitchen in quest of crumbs,
and grew so cheeky that when Ethel, the maid, who resented his
occasional flounders into her pudding dishes, drove him out through the
window, he would merely fly round the corner and pop in again through
the open door.

As at first the Watsons possessed neither dog nor cat, their garden
became for that spring at any rate a veritable bird sanctuary. A pied
fly-catcher built in the thatch of the summer-house, a pair of
gold-crested wrens swung their dainty cradle under a pine bough, a
nettle creeper nested in the long grass of the orchard, cole tits and
blue tits haunted the yew tree, a family of young water wagtails issued
from a hole under the stone bridge, and a wood pigeon took possession of
the top storey of a fir tree, to say nothing of the blackbirds,
thrushes, robins, and other everyday birds that availed themselves of
the hospitality of the bushes.

"I thought I owned Walden, but I'm beginning to doubt it," said Mrs.
Watson. "It seems to me that the wild creatures put in a prior claim,
and come unasked to share it."

"They're welcome, bless 'em!" murmured Avelyn, fondling a newly-fledged
and quite undismayed young missel-thrush, which she had temporarily
taken from its nest just outside the drawing-room window.

Some of the incidents which happened were decidedly funny. The Watsons
were not used to the country, and had to learn by experience. One
morning they had left some washing in the field, and found that a
neighbour's calves had strayed through a hole in the hedge and were
contentedly sucking stockings and pyjamas, and reducing them to a
jelly-like pulp. It took several sharp lessons before the family grasped
that cardinal rule of country life: "Keep your gate shut". On the first
Sunday of their occupation they had gone to church, and on returning had
strolled into the dining-room, to find three pigs comfortably in
possession. A wild scene ensued, for the intruders, instead of allowing
themselves to be chased through the door, careered madly round and round
the table, squeaking and grunting in protest, and finally jumped on to
the sofa, and made their exit through the open window, knocking over
books, work-baskets, and pots of geraniums in their hurried flight, and
completely flattening a bed of young pansies that had just been planted.

One night the family, who had sat up later than usual, heard stealthy
steps in the garden, and, fearful of burglars, issued forth in a body,
armed with the poker and other implements of aggression, only to find a
melancholy donkey cropping the grass beyond the laurel bushes, with
apparent appreciation of its superior juiciness.

These little adventures, however, added a spice of excitement to their
existence. They agreed that life at Walden was supremely interesting.

Daphne, who was nearly eighteen, had finished with lessons, and for the
summer term Mrs. Watson allowed Avelyn also to stay at home and run
wild. She had been growing fast, and a rest was considered good for her.
David and Anthony left the house every morning at half-past seven,
walked to Netherton Station, caught the train to Harlingden, and
proceeded to King James's School, where they spent the day and dined,
returning home by about six in the evening. They were sturdy boys of
fourteen and twelve, and enjoyed the daily expedition. Time had often
hung heavy on their hands out of school hours in Gerrard Square; it was
now agreeably filled in with a railway journey and a walk across fields
where birds' nests might be found, and where they sometimes saw stoats
and squirrels.

To the whole family the first sylvan spring and summer had been one long
round of delight. By the end of August they felt that town had faded
away from their mental vision, and that they had become "sons of the
soil".

In September Avelyn began school again as a weekly boarder at
Silverside. She had left The Hawthorns the preceding Christmas, and the
nine months' absence, with the intervening removal to Lyngates, had very
much blurred its memory. She had liked some of the girls, though she had
never made any really intimate friends there. She had been mildly sorry
to leave, but the regret had soon worn off. She had come to Silverside
quite ready to hallmark herself with the stamp of her new school, and
centre her interests there. To find that the greater part of "The
Hawthorns" was now incorporated with "Silverside", and that the boarders
identified her with her old set, had struck her somewhat as a shock.
What attitude she should adopt she could not quite determine. She wanted
to think over the situation carefully before she committed herself to
either side.




CHAPTER IV

An Encounter


The little freehold of "Walden" was a triangle, consisting of about two
acres of land. Its base abutted on the high road, and its apex was
wedged into another and much larger estate. The owner of this property
resided at Lyngates Hall. The Watsons had as yet only seen him in the
distance, but they knew from report that he was a naturalized German,
and that his name was Hockheimer. They had heard rumours that he was not
popular in the district. So long as he kept his live stock on his own
side of the hedge, Mrs. Watson did not concern herself about her
neighbour. When his cows strayed into her field she drove them back, and
had the gap securely mended to prevent further trespassing. She
considered that to be the end of the matter, and did not give Mr.
Hockheimer another thought. As for the young people, they had not yet
realized his existence. They discovered it one day quite suddenly and
unpleasantly.

The second Monday morning after her start at school, Avelyn was walking
to the station with her brothers to catch the 8.15 train. The weather
was still fine and summer-like, and the late September sunshine gilded
the yellowing nut trees, and turned the dew-drops in the long webs of
gossamer into diamonds. There was an exhilaration in being up and out so
early. The three marched along very cheerily, chatting as they went. As
they rounded the corner beyond the smithy, they could see, about two
hundred yards in front of them, a little figure in blue sports coat and
tam-o'-shanter, also making its way in the direction of Netherton.

"Who's that girl?" asked Anthony. "We see her every day; she goes in to
Harlingden by the same train that we do. She must be going to school,
because she always has a satchel of books with her."

"It looks like Pamela Reynolds," returned Avelyn. "She's new at
Silverside this term, and, now you speak of it, I remember somebody told
me she came from Lyngates, but I'd quite forgotten all about it till
this moment. I don't even know where she lives. Shall we sprint and
catch her up?"

The Watsons hurried their footsteps, and by dint of what might be termed
a forced march overtook Pamela on the brow of the hill. Avelyn greeted
her by name from behind. She turned, surprised. She was a fine-looking
girl of nearly fourteen, with wide-open honest brown eyes, a clear pale
skin, and bronze-brown hair, which curled at the ends, and had a
tendency to make little rings round her forehead. She was really pretty
when she smiled.

"Hallo!" she exclaimed. "I never expected to see you here! Aren't you
Avelyn Watson? I thought you were a boarder!"

"So I am, but only a weekly one. I come home from Friday to Monday. Do
you like being a day girl? Isn't it a long way to go every morning?"

"I don't mind; I used to have much farther to go to school when we lived
in Canada."

"Used you to live in Canada?"

"Yes, I was born there. I've only come to England lately."

"I haven't met you about Lyngates before."

"We've only been here a month."

"Who's 'we'?"

"Just my mother and I."

"Do you like England?"

"Pretty well. It's too cultivated after Canada. All these little walls
and hedges to divide the tiny fields make me laugh. It's like a dolls'
country. And I hate the high roads. Look here--there's a short cut
through that wood to the station. I go that way nearly every day. Will
you come?"

The Watsons were perfectly ready to explore anything in the shape of a
new path or by-lane. They helped Pamela to open the gate, and followed
her into the wood. The long vista of trees was delightful. The short
grass under foot was a vivid emerald green, there were patches of
yellowing bracken, clumps of crimson and orange toad-stools, spindle
bushes covered with scarlet berries, and trails of pale late honeysuckle
twining over the brambles. From the direction they were taking, they
must be cutting off a long corner on their way to the station.

They had walked for perhaps a few minutes, and were strolling on,
chatting as they went, when they suddenly heard a shout in front of
them, and someone came crashing through the undergrowth and stood
barring their path. The somebody in question was undoubtedly very angry.
He was a fair, short, stout, roundabout little man, with a big blond
moustache. His light-blue eyes flashed, and his large teeth gleamed
unpleasantly as he spoke. But he not only spoke, he shouted.

"What are you doing here? Do you know this wood's private property?
You've no business to be in it! Get out as fast as you can, the same way
you came! Be quick about it, or I'll know the reason why. I could have
you all taken up for trespassing if I liked. Why, _Pamela_!"

Pamela was standing staring at the surly objector, with a look of
mingled amazement, disgust, and defiance in her clear eyes.

"It's my fault, Uncle," she replied calmly. "It's a short cut to the
station through this wood, and to-day I brought these--friends"--she
hesitated for a moment over the word--"with me. I come this way nearly
every morning."

"Then you won't do it again!" thundered the short man. "Don't let me
ever catch you here any more, or any of your friends. You may understand
that once and for all, and I'll be obeyed. Go back, I tell you!"

He waved them savagely in the direction of the gate through which they
had come.

"Mayn't we go on just this once?" pleaded Pamela. "I'm afraid we'll miss
our train."

"Then miss it! What do I care? It's your own faults for trespassing, and
I hope you'll all get into trouble at school. You richly deserve it.
Back, I tell you, you young rascals!"

With an angry man raving like a lunatic in their path, there was nothing
for it but to beat a retreat as speedily as they could. When they had
passed through the gate, David looked at his watch.

"Five past eight! Thunder! We shall have to sprint if we want to catch
that train."

There was no time for comment. All four immediately set off running.
Each, perhaps, was buoyed up with an obstinate determination to reach
the station by 8.15 in spite of the unamiable hopes of the owner of the
wood. They only wished he could be there to see them defeat his
prophecy. In spite of such hindrances as bumping satchels, streaming
hair, and, in Anthony's case, a trailing bootlace, they panted along,
and covered the ground somehow. They could hear the train rumbling in
the distance, and could see the smoke of the engine as they raced down
the last hill. By the greatest of good luck a special cargo of milk-cans
and butter baskets had to be placed that morning in the luggage van, and
the extra two minutes spent in stowing them away saved the situation.
The guard was just waving his green flag as the Watsons and Pamela,
scarlet with their exertions, popped into the last carriage.

For a few minutes they were too breathless to speak. It was Anthony who
first found words.

"Well, of all raggy old lunatics commend me to that one!"

"Strafe the baity old blighter!" gasped David.

"I never heard of such meanness!" put in Avelyn. "Actually to _want_ us
to miss our train!"

"I'd have knocked him over for two pins," declared David savagely.

"Wish we'd tried!" growled Anthony.

"I don't know who he is, but he's no gentleman!" exploded Avelyn,
divided between her ruffled clothes and her ruffled feelings. "Sorry,
Pamela, if he's your uncle, but I can't help saying what I think."

Pamela was leaning back in a corner. She had taken off her blue
tam-o'-shanter, and was trying to re-tie her bronze-brown hair. She
looked up quickly.

"You needn't mind me. You can say anything you like about him. I only
wish he wasn't my uncle. We don't choose our relations, do we?"

"Nobody'd choose him if they could help it, I should think," replied
Avelyn frankly. "What's his name?"

"Mr. Hockheimer."

"The Mr. Hockheimer who lives at The Hall?"

"Yes."

"Why, he's a German, isn't he?"

"Yes, but I'm not! I'm as English as I possibly can be."

"Then how are you related to him?"

"He married my aunt."

"Oh!"

[Illustration: "DO YOU KNOW THIS WOOD'S PRIVATE PROPERTY?" HE SHOUTED]

There was a long pause, and then Anthony volunteered:

"If Auntie Belle was to marry a German, I'd never call her 'auntie'
again--never!"

"It was before the war, and she's dead now," groaned Pamela. "Uncle
Fritz has lived twenty years in England."

"How is it he's not interned?" asked David.

"He's naturalized, you see."

"Need you call him 'uncle'?"

"I'd rather not, but I've got to. I'd never seen him till I came here a
month ago."

"And you don't like him?"

For answer, Pamela suddenly burst into a storm of passionate tears.

"Like him! I hate him! Oh! why did we ever leave Canada and come to
England? It's wretched here, and I'm miserable. I'd like to run away!"
Then, dabbing her eyes with her pocket-handkerchief: "There, don't take
any notice of me, please. I get these fits sometimes. I'll feel better
soon. Please don't talk any more to me about uncle."

The Watsons glanced at her compassionately, and began to converse among
themselves upon other topics. Pamela stared hard out of the window,
blinked, and presently regained her composure. When the train arrived at
Harlingden, she and Avelyn walked to Silverside together, but they
talked of school concerns, and did not reopen the subject of Mr.
Hockheimer.

Before this happening Avelyn, though she had been vaguely aware of
Pamela's existence, had not mentally singled her out among the general
crowd of her schoolfellows. From that Monday morning she began to take
an interest in her. She smiled at her when they passed on the stairs,
and spoke to her occasionally in the playground. As they were in
different forms they had few opportunities of meeting, and even at
dinner the boarders sat at a different table from the day girls. Avelyn
looked out for Pamela on Friday afternoon, but she was not at the
station. She had either left school early, or was travelling by a later
train. She seemed such an attractive, pathetic little figure that
Avelyn's curiosity was aroused. She wanted to know where Pamela lived,
and more about her. She cast round in her mind for any likely source of
information, and decided upon Mrs. Garside, a fat kindly old soul, who
owned a farm close to Walden, and was disposed to be neighbourly and
talkative. On the excuse of going for the weekly butter she tapped at
the house door, and was ushered in. Mrs. Garside was busy washing pots,
but she placed a chair for her visitor, fetched the butter from the
dairy, and, as she packed it in the basket, glided off into
conversation. Once started, it was difficult to stop her, or to lead her
away from the various topics upon which her tongue ran so glibly. It was
only after much manoeuvring and a considerable amount of patience that
Avelyn could get her to concentrate on the subject of Pamela Reynolds.
Even then her mind side-tracked.

"A young lady with dark hair, that wears a blue tam-o'-shanter. Yes,
I've seen her--not that I like tam-o'-shanters, and I wouldn't get one
for Hilda, though she begged hard; I bought her a felt instead. Mr.
Hockheimer's niece? Yes, he lives at The Hall, though many think he's no
right to be there; and if I'd my way, I'd say an internment camp was the
right place for him. With two sons in the trenches it doesn't give one
any patience for these naturalized Germans, coming and turning out
decent English folk, too, that ought to be there instead of him. It was
a queer business, and people ought to make their wills properly before
they come to die, instead of leaving them half-written. I've made mine,
and divided what I've got equal share and share alike among my six
children, so that there won't be any quarrelling after my funeral, for
I've told them beforehand what to expect. And people say the old
Squire's ghost haunts The Hall, and small wonder; though it's not much
use, for a ghost can't sign a will, and he should have had the sense to
do it while he was alive."

Mrs. Garside's statements were so rambling and involved, that it took
Avelyn a very long time indeed to sift the information she wanted from
among the large number of superfluous details supplied by her loquacious
neighbour. By dint of pertinacity and tact, however, she pieced together
the following narrative.--

Pamela's ancestors had for many generations been Squires of Lyngates,
and had resided at The Hall. Her grandfather, Mr. George Reynolds, had
lived there until his death, two years ago. Mrs. Garside could remember
him since her girlhood--a tall, handsome man with a brown beard, who
rode about the country on a favourite white horse named Champion. He had
been a good landlord, and was well liked in the neighbourhood. His wife
had died early, and left two children, a son and daughter. The son, Mr.
Leonard, had been a high-spirited lad, and it was said in the village
that he and his father did not get on well together. There was some
upset and a quarrel, the rights of which nobody ever knew, for the
Squire was too proud to air his troubles, and kept family skeletons
securely locked in their cupboards. At any rate, Mr. Leonard had gone
away to Canada and started farming, and had never returned to his old
home, though he had written that he was married, and, later on, that he
had a daughter. This was all the news that Lyngates people had heard of
him in fourteen years. Whether he had prospered or otherwise on his
far-off Canadian ranch they did not know. Squire Reynolds's other child,
Miss Dora, had been a pretty girl, and her father's favourite. Many
years went by, however, before she married. She had been fond of
hunting, and used to look very smart riding to hounds in her neat
navy-blue habit. It was at a meet that she had first met Mr. Hockheimer.
He rented a shooting-box in the neighbourhood, and came down frequently
from London for week ends. Nobody could understand how this naturalized
German had obtained such a hold over Miss Dora and her father, though it
was rumoured that he had reinvested the Squire's money for him to great
advantage. Being a City man he was well acquainted with finance. Miss
Dora was long past her first youth, but she was still handsome, and
everyone in Lyngates had said that she was far too good for Mr.
Hockheimer. The village worthies, however, were not consulted, and the
wedding took place.

A year afterwards the European war broke out. There was great comment in
Lyngates on the position of Mr. Hockheimer, but he had proved himself to
be a naturalized British subject, and declared he was heart and soul on
the side of the Allies. He had been very energetic on local committees,
and had given large sums to the Belgian Fund.

When red war flamed in Flanders, and Britain summoned all her sons to
her standard, Leonard Reynolds, on his far-away ranch in the Rockies,
had heard the call and answered it. He had joined one of the first
Canadian contingents, and had come over the sea to "do his bit" for the
Motherland, leaving his wife and child at the ranch to carry on the
brave but wellnigh impossible task of keeping the home fires burning. In
his passage through England he had had thirty-six hours' leave, and had
visited his father at Lyngates. The villagers had seen him again after
fourteen years' absence, and had admired him in his khaki uniform. He
had spoken to several of them--words of fire and patriotism and
enthusiasm for the coming conflict.

Everybody lived for the newspapers in those first months of war, and
Lyngates was no exception to the general rule. In farm-house and
cottage they read of the retreat from Mons. Duke's son and plough-boy,
Oxford graduate and City clerk, scientist, shopman and crossing-sweeper
alike, had paid the great sacrifice, and the name of Leonard Reynolds
stood among them. The Squire was in bed at the time, recovering from a
severe operation. The news was broken to him by an injudicious nurse at
a crisis in his illness, and it proved his death-blow. In his few last
gasping words he had tried to say something about a will, but those who
were with him could not understand what he meant to convey. With the
incoherent message still trembling on his stricken lips he had passed
away into the silence. He was buried with his ancestors in Lyngates
churchyard, but there was no cross to mark the grave of his son Leonard.
The survivors of the Canadian contingent could give no details beyond
the fact that a certain portion of them had been utterly wiped out by a
terrific explosion. It was impossible to identify the dead. War was
reaping a red harvest of human lives.

After Squire Reynolds's funeral, Mr. and Mrs. Hockheimer had taken
possession of The Hall. Though search was made everywhere the only will
which could be discovered was one in the custody of the family
solicitor, which was dated fifteen years back. In the briefest terms it
left a certain sum of money to his daughter, and the estate of Lyngates
to his son, but in the event of the death of either, the survivor was to
inherit the whole property. As it had been drawn up before his son's
marriage, no mention was made in it of Leonard's wife and child. It was
a perfectly valid will, and it was duly proved, Mrs. Hockheimer
succeeding to the entire estate of her late father. She lived only six
months to enjoy it, and was laid to rest with her dead baby in her arms.
She had executed a will bequeathing everything to her husband, so that
Mr. Hockheimer, the naturalized German, assumed absolute command of the
Reynolds property.

Meanwhile, matters had gone hardly with the wife and child of Leonard
Reynolds. It had been impossible for them to farm the ranch, and they
had no private means. By the advice of her friends Mrs. Reynolds had
sold up her few possessions and had come to England with her daughter,
to find out at first hand from the lawyers whether any provision had
been made for her out of the estate. The solicitors were polite and
sympathetic: they acknowledged the keen injustice of the matter, but
assured her that there was no redress, and, according to British law,
Mr. Hockheimer had full rights of possession in the Lyngates property,
while she and her child could not claim so much as a solitary farthing.
They represented the case, however, to Mr. Hockheimer, and he at once
offered Mrs. Reynolds the use of a cottage on his land, together with a
small annual income, and promised to pay for Pamela's education at a day
school in Harlingden. As she had no other means of livelihood, Mrs.
Reynolds had accepted this help, and had settled down at Lyngates
shortly before this story begins. She was a fragile little woman,
gentle and clinging in disposition, and so battered by misfortune that
she was glad to rest anywhere where she could find a home. She received
Mr. Hockheimer's dole quite gratefully. With the loss of her husband
life had for her practically stopped. Through her daughter it held a
second-hand kind of interest. She welcomed the idea of Pamela attending
a good school, and her crushed soul even began to indulge in timid
little day-dreams concerning her child's future. These hopes, pathetic
and tender, were like wild sweet violets springing up over the
desolation of a battle-field.

Pamela viewed the situation from an utterly different standpoint. She
had inherited her grandfather's strength of character along with the
Reynolds features, and also a considerable share of his pride. Her early
life in Canada had made her more independent than most English girls of
her age. She considered that by all rights of justice an equal half of
the Lyngates estate should have been hers, and that her uncle, Mr.
Hockheimer, had managed to steal her inheritance. She hated to accept
from him as charity what she felt ought to have been her own, and she
bitterly resented the patronizing attitude which he adopted towards
herself and her mother. She, too, had her day-dreams, and most of them
centred round a time when she would be old enough to shake off this
thraldom of dependence and strike out a line of her own in the world.




CHAPTER V

Ructions


By the end of a few weeks Avelyn began to feel more settled down in her
new quarters at Silverside. The old pupils might regret the former
regime, but she was tolerably satisfied with the new. She was in the
fifth form, and found the work not too arduous, and liked Miss Kennedy,
her teacher. She had been accustomed to the bustle of a large school,
and, though Laura Talbot might rave against the crowded conditions, to
Avelyn it was amusing to be in a room crammed full of girls. School is a
separate world of its own, and often a curious one. To outsiders and to
its Principal, Silverside might appear as an enterprise that was growing
and prospering exceedingly. Its numbers had suddenly more than doubled,
it had fresh teachers, and was going to build a cloak-room and a
gymnasium; nothing could seemingly have more hope of success. Inwardly,
however, it was a seething whirl of opposing factions. The old and the
new did not readily amalgamate. The boarders were jealous of their
rights, and would not yield an inch of the privileged position they had
always been wont to occupy; while the Hawthorners, accustomed to the
absolute democracy of a day school, could not and would not understand
why boarders should expect to have any privileges at all.

Trouble began on the very second day of term. Adah, in her new capacity
of head girl, had pinned a paper on the notice board announcing a
general meeting of the Dramatic Society for 4.15 in the studio. The old
members turned up at the time named, to find a group of Hawthorners
already in possession of the room. Adah, after waiting a minute, glanced
at the clock and coughed significantly; then, as this produced no
result, she remarked:

"Won't you be rather late if you're not getting home soon?"

"We don't much mind," returned Annie Broadside easily.

"Well, the fact is, we want to use this room," continued Adah. "We're
going to have a meeting."

"I know. That's why we've come."

Adah's eyebrows elevated themselves to an astonishing angle.

"You've come to our meeting?" she exclaimed incredulously.

"Certainly we have. Why not?"

Annie asked the question aggressively.

"Because you're not members of the Dramatic."

"But we want to join."

Adah turned to her friends, who stood looking scornfully at the
intruders.

"Did you hear that?" she remarked. "They actually want to join the
Dramatic!"

"Cheek!" murmured Consie, and the others giggled.

"And why shouldn't we join?" flamed Gladys Wilks.

"Why? Because you're day girls, and the Dramatic's only for boarders.
That's the reason."

"It's no reason at all," answered Maggie Stuart sharply. "The boarders
have no right to monopolize any society. It ought to be free and open to
the whole school."

"But it can't!" snapped Adah. "Surely you can see for yourselves that it
wouldn't work. We have all our rehearsals in the evenings, when day
girls couldn't possibly come."

"You could fix them from four to five instead," suggested Annie.

"We're not going to alter our arrangements for anybody," returned Adah
tartly.

"The boarders have always run the Dramatic," added Consie. "We'd like to
begin our meeting, please, when we can have the studio to ourselves."

"Oh, very well! Keep your wretched society to yourselves if you want!"
yapped Annie; "but I'll tell you this, at any rate, I think it's most
monstrously unfair. You needn't expect us to help you with any of your
schemes, for we just shan't!"

"Don't excite yourselves--we haven't asked you!" sneered Consie
freezingly as the Hawthorners flounced out of the room.

At first the committee was too agitated to discuss business. It was
ablaze with indignation at the impudence of mere day girls aspiring to
join the select circle.

"How could we let them?" fluttered Joyce Edwards. "To begin with, there
wouldn't be enough parts to go round, nor enough costumes. Dear me! we
should have the Juniors expecting to appear on the platform! What next,
I wonder? We Seniors have always done the acting, and let the kids and
day girls make the audience."

"And we'll go on doing so!" declared Adah. "We're the prefects, and
we'll manage the school affairs as we like, without interference from
anybody."

The decision about the Dramatic was the same as regarded most of the
other societies. The boarders kept them jealously to themselves. The day
girls grumbled, even protested indignantly, but they were powerless to
make any change. The four prefects were all boarders, and exercised
their newly-granted authority for their own advantage. Miss Thompson had
no idea of the state of affairs. In appointing as school officers girls
who had been with her for some years, she thought she was safeguarding
the tone of Silverside and preserving its traditions intact. She had
certainly no intention of establishing an oligarchy; yet in effect that
was what had resulted. The members of the Boarders' League felt pledged
to support one another against all outsiders, and every activity of the
school was in the hands of a clique.

Adah, as head girl, was intensely patronizing. She was puffed up with
pride in her new office, and would explain Silverside customs with an
airy superiority which aggravated the Hawthorners continually. Their
injured souls rallied round Annie Broadside. Annie was a born leader.
She keenly resented the state of affairs, and meant to show fight. She
only waited a suitable opportunity, and at length it came.

For the first few weeks of term the boarders had been busy with various
affairs on Saturdays, and had contented themselves with an occasional
game of tennis and croquet. At the beginning of October they suddenly
realized that the hockey season was beginning. So far hockey, and indeed
any organized games, had been only very languidly pursued at Silverside.
The smallness of the school had not given a wide choice of champions,
and for some years the elder girls had been more interested in botany
and butterfly collecting than in sports.

Silverside had had a hockey team, and had occasionally played a match,
though it could not pride itself on its record of goals. The present
prefects had never distinguished themselves remarkably at athletics, but
they were sufficiently enthusiastic to wish the school to win successes.
They called a boarders' meeting to discuss matters.

"We ought to have a splendid games club this term," smiled Adah
complacently. "There should be several sets of hockey going on in the
same afternoon."

"There isn't room in the field for more than one," ventured Laura
Talbot.

"Then we must take a larger field," decreed Consie. "With so many new
subscriptions we can easily afford it."

"Ninety-five girls instead of only thirty-six in a school make a
difference," admitted Irma Ridley.

"The treasurer will have quite a nice little sum in hand," chuckled
Isobel Norris.

"I want the school to begin and make a name for itself," said Adah. "I
don't want to say anything against Jessie Carew and Maggie Stephens,
last year, but really we all know they were slackers."

"Silverside must buck up!" agreed the others.

"You, Laura, and Janet, and Ethelberga have the makings of good players
in you," murmured Adah reflectively, "and of course Consie and myself,
and perhaps Joyce."

"What about the Hawthorners?" asked Isobel.

"We shall have to include them, of course."

"Couldn't get up the teams without them, I'm afraid," sniggered Minnie
Selburn.

Adah stared hard at Minnie, who straightened her face and sat up
stiffly.

"In the matter of hockey, of course, everybody in the school, whether
day girl or boarder, will be invited to join," continued Adah.

"Some of those Hawthorners are jolly good," ventured Mona Bardsley.

"They won ever so many matches last year, I believe," added Alice
Webster.

"Whom did they play?" asked Adah quickly.

"I don't know."

"I do," said Avelyn, speaking for the first time. "It was Workington
Ladies' College, Mirton High School, Redlands County School, and
Harlingden Ladies' Team, and they beat them all, except Harlingden, and
that was a draw."

Adah was rapidly scribbling some entries in her notebook.

"We'll challenge Workington Ladies' College," she announced. "I wanted
us to do it last year, but we decided our team wasn't strong enough.
I'll write to their secretary to-night and make a fixture. It would be a
tremendous triumph for Silverside to beat Workington. They've rather a
reputation."

"The old school's going to forge ahead!" smiled Consie.

"We'll ask Miss Thompson to speak about hiring that larger field," said
Isobel. "We'd better secure it at once, in case the farmer should let it
to anybody else."

Next day Adah pinned up a notice, announcing that hockey would begin on
the following Saturday afternoon, and asking all girls to sign their
names as members of the games club, and to pay their subscriptions to
the treasurer. She watched the day girls come and surge round the notice
board, then she ran upstairs to her form room. She considered that she
was performing her duties admirably as head of the school.

Meantime, downstairs, a ferment was going on that would have surprised
her. The grumblings and dissatisfaction increased till a whisper began
to circulate.

"Annie Broadside says, don't sign or do anything yet, but let the 'Old
Hawthorners' League' meet on the common this afternoon at 4.15. Pass
this on, and all turn up."

The boarders could not understand why, that afternoon, the day girls
scuttled away so promptly at four o'clock, and seemed in such a frantic
hurry to get on their boots and be gone. As a rule they loitered about
in an annoying fashion, and were seldom clear of the premises till
half-past four. The prefects ventured the opinion that Silverside rules
were at last beginning to be properly kept. They would have been
immensely electrified if they could have seen what was really happening.

Not far from the house was a small common, which most of the girls were
bound to pass on their way to and from school. To-day, instead of going
home they trooped here. There was an old tree stump at one side, and
Annie, scrambling to the top of it, and holding on by a branch, made it
serve as an orator's platform from which to address her audience, which
stood below. She first of all looked round critically.

"Are we all here?" she began.

Several voices replied:

"All who could come."

"Some girls had to catch trains."

"And the Potters had music lessons."

"And Trissie Marsh had to go to the dentist's."

"But they sympathize. They'd have come if they could."

"I'm glad to hear that," continued Annie. "I like to know I have your
sympathy. Are we all old Hawthorners?"

"Yes, yes!"

"And no spies among us?"

"Certainly not!"

"Then I can speak freely. I want to say, what I'm sure we all think,
that we're perfectly disgusted with the way those boarders have been
behaving. They speak as if the school existed for them, and them alone.
Some societies we aren't allowed to join at all, and those that we may
belong to are kept well in their own hands, because they appoint
themselves as presidents, and secretaries, and treasurers, and members
of committee. We simply haven't a look in anywhere. Now, I ask you, is
this fair?"

"Not at all!" howled the girls.

"We're exactly in the position of serfs, and it's monstrous. What right
have those boarders to rule over us?"

"None!"

"It's quite time we showed our spirit. I've been wondering for a long
time how we could checkmate them, and now I see my way clear. They're
going to start the hockey season."

"Yes!"

"Who do you think will make all the arrangements and be captains of the
teams? Boarders or day girls?"

"Why, boarders, of course."

"And who are the best players; who are going to win the goals?"

"_We_ are!"

"Of course, we are; everybody knows that! But the boarders would take
all the credit, and talk about _their_ successes. The very idea makes me
ill! Why should we play for _them_?"

"Why, indeed?"

"We're not obliged to. Our Saturdays are our own, and nobody can make us
come and play hockey if we don't want. I vote we just say we won't join
their old games club. Let's start a rival one of our own."

"Yes, yes! Oh, do let us!"

"We'll call it 'The Old Hawthorners' Hockey Club', and we'll hire our
old ground and wear our old colours, and play matches of our own, and
let those conceited Silversiders go to Jericho."

Annie's daring suggestion met with a chorus of applause. The
Hawthorners, made to feel unwelcome in their new school, clung
desperately to their old traditions. They had had an excellent hockey
record in past years, and felt confident that they could raise a team
sufficiently strong to challenge their former rivals to matches.

"Will you elect Gladys as secretary?" asked Annie. "That's all right.
And Maggie as treasurer? Then give in your names, and bring your
subscriptions to-morrow, and I'll go this very night and see about
getting our old field. It belongs to Mr. Gardner, and my father knows
him quite well, so I'm sure we shall manage it. If not, we'll hire
another field."

"Or play on the common," declared the girls as they crowded round Gladys
Wilks, giving in their names.

Adah Gartley had kept her word and written immediately to the secretary
of Workington Ladies' College, who had replied by return of post,
arranging a match for a date in November. She showed the letter with
much satisfaction to the boarders after breakfast.

"By the by, have those day girls paid their subscriptions yet to the
Games Club?" she asked suddenly.

"Not one of them," answered Isobel.

"The blighters! And hockey begins to-morrow. Isn't it just like day
girls? I must talk to them about it at eleven o'clock 'break'."

The day girls were busy consuming packets of lunch when Adah, glass of
milk and piece of bread and butter in hand, strolled amongst them, bent
on her mission.

"Look here, you slackers! D'you know you've never paid your half-crowns
yet? Can't admit anybody to the hockey field who hasn't given in her
subscription--that's one of the traditions of Silverside."

"Is it?" said Annie Broadside casually. "I can't see that it concerns
us."

"You'll see to-morrow when you get to the field. A nice little
disappointment it will be for you to find you're not allowed to play."

Annie took a big bite of oatcake and gulped it.

"Suppose we don't want to play?"

"Not want to play!" Adah's expression was one of sheer incredulity.

"Why should we? You boarders have taken up all the other societies, so
you may have the hockey as well. We don't want to intrude on your
privileges, thanks!"

"But I say," blustered Adah, "you _must_ play! We've got to win matches
and keep up the credit of the school."

"Keep it up yourselves!" put in Gladys sarcastically. "You've rubbed it
into us hard enough that it's only you who understand the school
traditions, and we're nothing but outsiders!"

"But you're keen on hockey! Surely you want to play?" Adah was making a
desperate effort to curb her temper and be conciliatory.

"Certainly we do, but we're going to have a club to ourselves."

"You can't here!"

"We don't mean to try. It's an 'Old Hawthorners' Club', and nothing to
do with Silverside."

"But you mustn't! You shan't go ratting like this!" exploded Adah,
scarlet with indignation.

"Don't get excited!" said Annie politely. "There's nothing to prevent
us. Our Saturdays are our own, and nobody can compel us to come to
school and play hockey if we don't want."

"You miserable blighters!"

"There! Keep a civil tongue, please. I thought the traditions of
Silverside didn't run to slang. Perhaps you'd like to arrange a match
with us: 'The Old Hawthorners' versus 'Silverside Boarders'? Gladys is
our secretary, and will book it."

"I shall do nothing of the sort!" choked Adah, beating as dignified a
retreat as she could.

It was certainly a terrible blow for the prefects. They had counted
entirely on the strength of the day girls in arranging teams. To be
deserted in this fashion meant the ruin of the hockey season. They were
aghast at the bad news.

"I wonder if Miss Thompson can refuse the larger field?" speculated
Joyce.

"We certainly can't afford to hire it with the subscriptions we've got,"
mourned Isobel.

"And it's not the slightest use our trying a match with Workington, for
we should only get a jolly good licking," announced Consie. "We don't
want to court disaster."

"I shall write to the secretary to-night," said Adah bitterly, "and tell
her we've been obliged to make other arrangements. Those day girls are
the absolute limit!"

"Don't you think," ventured Isobel, "that perhaps you've been a little
high-handed? If you'd tried to conciliate them, now----"

"Conciliate!" echoed Adah scornfully. "Really, Isobel, what next? If you
think I'm going to truckle to day girls, you're much mistaken."

"I'm afraid we're making a good many mistakes," murmured Isobel, but too
low for her friend to overhear her.

The three other prefects certainly laid the blame of this occurrence on
Adah, and considered that, if they had conducted the negotiations in her
place, they would have been able to manage the refractory Hawthorners.
Though they always loyally supported their head girl, they were quite
aware that her overbearing manners gave offence. They sometimes suffered
from her themselves. She had so thoroughly established herself as
leader, however, that it was not possible to break away from her rule.
She had been longer than any other girl at Silverside, and thus stood
for the old traditions. Whether these in the end were going to prove the
best for the school was a matter that admitted of some debate.




CHAPTER VI

Reprisals


After learning the story of the Lyngates estate, Avelyn's interest in
Pamela Reynolds was doubled, and she cultivated her acquaintance. The
two girls travelled together from Harlingden on Friday afternoons, and
arranged to meet on Monday mornings to walk in company to the station.
Though Pamela was not yet fourteen she was old for her age; her
adventurous life in Canada had given her a mental outlook different from
that of most English girls. She proved a lively and very pleasant
companion. Mrs. Watson, to whom Avelyn confided her friend's story, paid
a call upon Mrs. Reynolds, and found her a timid, refined lady, of
gentle birth and breeding, greatly saddened with her troubles, and
evidently without much initiative. The cottage, which had been lent to
her by Mr. Hockheimer, was in a very out-of-the-way situation. It was
small, inconvenient, and possessed many drawbacks, but she had made the
sitting-room pretty with books and flowers, and the little home had a
cultured air about it. Mrs. Reynolds did not seem to wish to seek any
society, and gently intimated that she feared she was not strong enough
to walk as far as the village and return calls.

"The poor woman has simply sat down under her troubles," said Mrs.
Watson, describing her experiences at the family supper-table. "It's
easy to see that she has no spirit. If she would take life more pluckily
it would be better for herself and everybody. I'm sorry for that child.
To live in that quiet spot with such a depressed companion, especially
when by all rights they ought to have owned The Hall. It makes my blood
boil! Mr. Hockheimer ought to have done more for them than this."

"Catch Mr. Hockheimer doing much for anybody!" commented Daphne. "People
say he's the stingiest landlord. They grumble dreadfully. I think he
ought to have had Mrs. Reynolds and Pamela to live with him at The
Hall."

"Oh, Pamela would have just hated that!" put in Avelyn. "She simply
can't bear her uncle."

"I don't blame her," sniffed Daphne.

"Oh, Muvvie, couldn't we ask Pamela to tea?" said Avelyn. "It must be so
lonely for her up there, without any brothers and sisters. I believe
she'd love to come."

"Well, we'll give her the chance at any rate," agreed Mrs. Watson. "I
hope her mother won't be stupid and refuse to let her come. I think I'd
better send a formal invitation."

The note was duly written and dispatched. Mrs. Reynolds appeared to need
some days to think the matter over, but finally sent a formal
acceptance.

"Hooray!" triumphed Daphne. "I quite expected she was going to decline
with thanks. Muvvie, how glad I am that you're a nice, sensible person,
and not morbid! You'd have been such a trial to us if you'd always gone
about with an air of depressed resignation."

"I've had my troubles as well as other people," said Mrs. Watson. "It
certainly doesn't make them any better to mourn over them. We've got to
sit up and make the best of things as they are. 'Never say die!' is a
good old motto. I'd try to be chirpy and cheery if I were reduced to a
wooden leg and a glass eye!"

"So you would, Muvvie darling! I believe you'd dance a jig with a
crutch. But about Pamela----"

"We'll give her a good time when she comes, poor child!"

The warm-hearted Watsons were determined to make Pamela thoroughly
welcome, and they succeeded royally. She was painfully shy for the first
ten minutes, and answered all questions in embarrassed monosyllables,
but after a walk round the garden she began to thaw, by the end of tea
she had waxed expansive, and later on she proved downright amusing. By
the time the family, in a body, escorted her home, they felt that they
had sealed a friendship. They talked her over on the way back.

"She's sporty," decided David.

"Decent as far as girls go," qualified Anthony, who at twelve did not
yield readily to feminine attractions.

"I call her charming," said Daphne. "You can see she's plenty in
her--not one of those lackadaisical people like Ella Simpson, who just
put on side. It seems to me a most monstrous thing that her uncle should
have been able to take all the property."

"Collared the lot!" grunted David. "The old Hun!"

"Mrs. Garside told me that everybody said Squire Reynolds must have made
a later will--the butler and coachman remembered signing something. But
it couldn't be found."

"Likely enough old Hockheimer suppressed it. He'd be equal to any dirty
German trick!" suggested Anthony.

"If he has he deserves penal servitude."

"I'd prefer shooting for him," said Anthony grimly.

The Watsons liked Pamela for herself, but it certainly gave her an added
interest to consider her the victim of her uncle's greed and injustice.
They thoroughly detested Mr. Hockheimer. Since the morning when he had
turned them out of the wood they had owed him a grudge, and other
matters had accumulated to swell the account. His land, unfortunately,
adjoined theirs. I have mentioned before that the little property of
Walden was shaped like a triangle, the apex of which jutted into Mr.
Hockheimer's estate. This apex consisted of a piece of rather marshy
rushy ground. The brook divided at its head, and flowing round it in two
separate streams reunited, making the patch of meadow into an island,
connected with the main land by a rough plank bridge. It was of little
service from a farmer's point of view, but it was a most picturesque
spot, and Mrs. Watson intended to turn it into a water garden. She and
Daphne spent hours poring over Barr's catalogues, and deciding what
iris, forget-me-nots, ranunculi, and other marsh-loving plants they
should send for, and whether it would be possible to dam a piece of the
brook to make a pool for water-lilies.

Imagine their annoyance when one day they found their cherished island
in the occupation of Mr. Hockheimer's cows, which had walked down the
stream from their own field. With great difficulty the Watsons drove
them back, and replaced the rather broken tree-trunk, which acted as
barrier, across the brook. When the same incident happened again Mrs.
Watson complained, and requested Mr. Hockheimer to see that his cows
kept to their own field. He replied by stating that they had always been
accustomed to graze on the island, which was really a no-man's
territory, not strictly included in either property, though, if the
matter were to be investigated, it would probably be found to be
included in the Lyngates estate.

Much surprised, and angry at such an assertion, Mrs. Watson looked up
the plans of Walden which went with her title-deeds, and found the
island most certainly represented as her property. She called in the
assistance of the village joiner, and caused a strong barrier to be
fixed across the stream at the head of the island, sufficient to keep
out cows and make a landmark for the boundary of her territory from
that of her acquisitive neighbour. This being done she considered the
matter settled, and proceeded to plant her iris and forget-me-nots. She
anticipated a beautiful show from them in the spring.

Towards the end of October, Daphne, whose health had picked up with
country air, nevertheless had to report herself to the specialist who
had previously examined her, and she and her mother made an expedition
to London. They started on a Thursday, and were to spend Sunday with
friends in town, returning home on the following Monday or Tuesday.
Avelyn, David, and Anthony, together with Ethel, the maid, had the
establishment to themselves for the week-end. With her mother's
permission, Avelyn asked Pamela to spend the Saturday afternoon at
Walden.

The young folks were determined to have a thoroughly happy harum-scarum
time together, and, instead of taking a conventional tea in the
dining-room, they carried their meal into the barn, and held a picnic
feast, sitting on blocks of wood, with the wheelbarrow for a table, and
with Billy, the dog, Meg, the cat, and Tiny, the bantam cock, as
self-invited guests.

"It's rather a stunt being all on our own for once!" opined Anthony,
feeding Billy with crust, regardless of the rationing order.

"Top-hole!" murmured Avelyn, pouring out milk for Meg into her saucer.

"I wish something would happen!" said David, rocking himself airily to
and fro on his billet of wood.

"Something _will_ happen if you're not careful, old sport! You'll topple
over next minute!" warned Avelyn.

"What do you want to happen?" asked Pamela.

"Something exciting--an air raid, or a fire, or a burglary. Something
really to give one spasms!"

Pamela did not reply for a moment. She rested her head on her hand and
thought. When she spoke there was an undercurrent of doubt in her voice.

"I don't know whether I ought to tell you," she hesitated. "I'm not
supposed to know, only I happened to overhear. I don't care, I _shall_
tell! He's only my uncle by marriage, and I detest him!"

"Do you mean Mr. Hockheimer?" asked Avelyn, in a sudden flutter.

"Yes; I wish I didn't!"

"What about him?"

Pamela hesitated again, then whispered:

"He's coming here, just at dusk, with an axe and a saw."

"What for?"

The Watsons had clustered round, with faces full of horrified
expectancy.

"To take down that barrier across the stream. He says the island's his."

If the enemy had landed, the Watsons could not have been more astonished
and indignant. Their opinion of Mr. Hockheimer had been bad before, but
that he should take advantage of their mother's absence to perform such
an abominable and utterly illegal act made their blood boil.

"There are two opinions about the island," declared David grimly. "Mr.
Hockheimer will find he's not going to get things all his own way. What
time did he say he was coming?"

"Just at dusk."

"All right! We'll be ready for him! Thanks ever so much for letting us
know. I say, Tony, come into the yard with me; I want to speak to you.
I've got a brain wave!"

"What's it about, Davie?" asked Avelyn excitedly.

"I'll tell you afterwards, Ave."

Out in the yard the two boys held a hasty confabulation. They felt that
they must act quickly. It was their duty to protect their mother's
property from this Hun robber. The situation appealed to their boyish
instincts. David's eyes gleamed with a wrathful twinkle. Anthony's young
fists were tightly clenched. They laid a careful plan of campaign, then
started off to secure recruits. In ten minutes they returned from the
village with three Boy Scouts, to whom they unfolded their designs. They
hurried off at once to the island, to survey the scene of action. The
barrier which Mrs. Watson had caused to be erected across the brook, was
constructed of two stout poles with withies intertwined; the ends were
secured in the banks, and there was room for the water, even in flood,
to flow underneath. On the Walden side of the stream were some large
stepping-stones, which the joiners had placed for their convenience
when fixing the posts into the overhanging bank. David and Anthony, with
their scout friends, took off boots and stockings, and after a
considerable amount of shoving and splashing, managed to move away the
small stones that supported these boulders, leaving them apparently
safe, but in reality only lightly balanced in the brook. They had barely
finished when twilight began to fall.

"We'll clear out now!" commanded David. "He may come any minute, and I
want him to be hard at work before we appear on the scenes. We'll catch
him red-handed."

"And give him more than he expects!" chuckled Anthony.

Going back to the house, the boys took Avelyn into their confidence.
They felt that it would be mean to leave her out of such a thrilling
adventure.

"If you're game to come, you can," they allowed graciously. "It ought to
be a sporty job!"

"Blossomy!" agreed Avelyn. "I wouldn't miss it for worlds. But what
about Pamela? She'd enjoy it, of course, but her uncle would know she'd
given the show away."

"She must hide behind the bushes, and not let him see her. It'll be
top-hole for Pamela!"

The alders and clumps of furze were thick down by the stream, quite
sufficient to give shelter to the little party of seven that presently
took cover there. They preserved strict military discipline. Not a word
was spoken. All crouched silently watching and waiting. The sun had set,
and the red glow faded from the sky, but there was a young moon, and
objects were clear. David held Billy by the collar. He was a sporting
dog, and trained not to bark; though he panted and his eyes bulged, he
did not betray the whereabouts of his owner by even the suspicion of a
yelp. Early experience with a former master, addicted to poaching, had
taught him his lesson.

Just when the owls had wakened, and were beginning to hoot round the
barns, Mr. Hockheimer came striding down his field. He was annoyed with
Mrs. Watson for having put the barrier across the stream. There had
indeed been one in the days of the former tenant, but it had
conveniently tumbled into the water, leaving a pathway for his cows to
graze on the island. He believed that by a little bluff and persistence
he could persuade Mrs. Watson that the island was part of his own
property. German-like, he had small opinion of women, and considered
that a widow's substance would be an easy prey. He had decided to see to
the matter himself, instead of bringing his bailiff or his keeper with
him. Since the war began, his men had been apt to make themselves very
disagreeable over trifles, and it was not worth having a fuss about so
small a business.

He stood on the top of the crag and surveyed the barrier. How to get to
it was the first question. It was fixed just where the stream ran in a
narrow gully between two high banks. He mentally strafed the village
joiner for having placed it in such an inaccessible spot. From his own
land it was practically impossible to reach it. The only thing to be
done was to go into Mrs. Watson's field. He had no scruples about
trespassing, and taking his axe he hacked down some branches, and
cleared himself a way through the hedge. It was comparatively easy now
to reach the barrier. There were stepping-stones obligingly left by the
workmen, which would be of great assistance to him. Saw and axe in hand
he advanced upon them, quite unwitting that seven pairs of eyes (eight
with Billy's) were watching his movements from the shadow of the bushes.
The first two stones were secure enough, and gave him confidence; the
third tottered a little, and he stepped hastily from it on to the
fourth, only to find that it capsized altogether and landed him suddenly
on his back in the water. The stream was not deep enough to drown, but
was quite sufficient to immerse him. He splashed and floundered about,
and rose wrathful and spluttering, to find five boy figures standing in
the field and grinning at his discomfiture.

"Dear me, Mr. Hockheimer," said David, with feigned commiseration, "I'm
afraid you're wet!"

Mr. Hockheimer's remarks, being in German, were probably better not
translated. He waded ashore and began to wring the water from his
clothes.

"May I ask what you were doing?" continued David blandly.

"A job that I mean to finish, you young rascal!" girned Mr. Hockheimer
gruffly.

"Excuse me, but that fence is my mother's property, and if anybody
interferes with it we're out here to protect it."

"And I'm here to remove it!" roared the German. "Take yourselves off,
you young chimpanzees!"

"You forget it's our own field," continued David with icy politeness.
"It's we who must ask you to take yourself off. Oh, very well!" as the
German made a threatening movement towards him, "Billy, will you give
Mr. Hockheimer a hint to go?"

Billy had been straining at his collar to suffocation point. Now,
released and encouraged by his master, he flew, barking furiously, at
the intruder, and seized him by the leg of his wet trouser.

Mr. Hockheimer yelled, freed himself by a kick, and, turning to see the
angry dog ready to spring at him again, saved himself by suddenly
climbing up an old willow stump that overhung the brook. He swarmed up
with an agility surprising in a man of his stout build. Wet and draggled
from his dip in the stream, he cut a sorry figure clinging among the
branches, while Billy, mad with rage, jumped and yelped down below.

"Call off that brute!" shouted the German hoarsely.

"There's no hurry," answered David. "I want to talk to you a little, Mr.
Hockheimer. It's a good opportunity while you're resting."

"Call him off and let me go, you little villain!"

"If you _will_ trespass in our field you must expect the dog to get
excited. It says in the Commination Service, 'Cursed is he that
removeth his neighbour's landmark'. (Perhaps you don't go to Church on
Ash Wednesdays?) Now, you were distinctly trying to remove my mother's
landmark, and if I let you go I may be compounding a felony. I've got
some witnesses here, at any rate. What a gap you made in the fence! We
shall have to make that up. Tony, old chap, keep guard for a while."

"Right you are!" answered Anthony sturdily.

Percy Houghton had brought his father's hedging-gloves and a billhook,
so, leaving Anthony as sentry by the tree, David, with the aid of the
boys, repaired the hedge. He whistled cheerily the while.

Mr. Hockheimer was feeling far from cheerful. He was wet, cold, and in a
most undignified position. Every time he ventured to let his leg down so
much as an inch the dog showed all his teeth in an ugly snarl. The
prospect of spending a much longer time perched in the tree was not
pleasing. He judged it wiser to arrange terms.

"Come, come, you've had your little joke," he expostulated in a milder
tone. "Call your dog away, and I will go home."

"Will you give me your solemn undertaking not to trespass on our
property again, or attempt to remove our landmarks?" demanded David
grandly.

His victim grunted something which might be interpreted as assent.

"Then we'll let you off this time. Tony, hold Billy! Shall I help you
down, Mr. Hockheimer? You're rather stiff, I expect."

"I can manage myself," growled the German sulkily, as he descended with
a thud.

"We've made up the fence, so we shall have to let you out through our
yard," observed David. "By the by, you dropped a saw and an axe into the
brook. I'll fish them out to-morrow by daylight and throw them over into
your field. I call that Christian charity. I might have commandeered
them or let them stop in the stream and rust away. Dear me, you're
_very_ wet! I hope you won't catch cold!"

Mr. Hockheimer made no reply, but stumped after the boys up the field
and through the stable-yard. David held the gate open for him most
courteously, and he passed through into the road. Then he turned and
shook his fist.

"You shall pay for this some day!" he muttered. "I don't forget!"

"Neither do I," returned David. "Good-night, Mr. Hockheimer!"

As the boys came back round the side of the barn they met Avelyn and
Pamela, who had run up from the field. The two girls had kept hidden
among the bushes, but had seen and heard most of what was going on.

"You don't think he saw me?" asked Pamela. "I believe he'd kill me if he
knew I'd told."

"I don't believe he could possibly see you, not even from up in the
tree. It was getting so dark," David assured her.

"He has an awful temper!" shivered Pamela.

"Oh, Dave, you did bait him!" said Avelyn with a chuckle. "I didn't know
you could be so sarcastic. I nearly died trying not to laugh out loud.
How did you think of it all?"

"It came on the spur of the moment," admitted David modestly. "I've
rather an idea I'd like to be a barrister when I grow up, if the war's
over."

"I'd like to be a detective and snap the handcuffs on criminals,"
declared Tony, giving Billy his last honey-drop as a reward of virtue.




CHAPTER VII

Miss Hopkins


Though Avelyn, as a weekly boarder, was not quite in the innermost heart
of the Silverside clique, she was nevertheless considered one of the
elect. Her room-mates rubbed it into her that she _was_ a boarder, and
as such must be very thankful for her privileges. On the whole, they
treated her rather well. They included her as much as they could in what
fun was going on, helped her to plait her hair, showed her their private
treasures, and shared their occasional boxes of chocolate impartially
round the dormitory. Avelyn felt that she was living two lives: one
began at nine o'clock on Monday morning, and lasted till four on Friday,
and the other occupied the intervening time. Each circled independently
in its own orbit. The school life was quite fascinating and absorbing,
especially now she was getting used to it. It was jolly to sit on the
beds in the dormitory and compare experiences with the other girls. They
generally had something interesting to talk about, especially Irma
Ridley. Irma had an inventive mind, and a keen appetite for romance. She
read every novel she could get hold of, though only a very few, and
those of a strictly classical character, were allowed in the Silverside
library. She had a good memory, was an excellent raconteuse, and would
sit in the gloaming and tell thrilling tales to anybody who was prepared
to listen. To her room-mates she supplied the place of a monthly
magazine of fiction. It was Irma who first started the rumour about Miss
Hopkins. The girls were dressing for supper when she made her amazing
statement.

"Do you know," she remarked, pausing with her hairbrush in her hand, "I
verily believe that Hopscotch either already is, or is just about to
be--engaged!"

If Cupid himself had darted in through the window, bow and arrows in
hand, the occupants of the Cowslip Room could not have been more
electrified.

"What!"

"Hopscotch?"

"You're ragging!"

"It's the limit!"

Miss Hopkins, the mathematics mistress, had never struck the school as a
likely subject for romance. She was middle-aged, nippy, determined,
brusque, and a disciplinarian. There was a slight burr in her speech,
acquired north of the Tweed, and she had a habit of saying, "Come, come,
girrls!" She had never yet been seen without her pince-nez, and it was a
tradition that she slept in them. In the minds of her pupils she was
indissolubly intertwined with decimals, equations, and problems of
geometry. They connected her with triangles, not hearts, though of
course there was no telling where the little blind god might suddenly
elect to shoot.

"I'm not ragging!" declared Irma earnestly. "I tell you I really mean
it. What's more, I've seen him!"

"When?"

"Where?"

Irma enjoyed an audience. She sat down on Janet's bed with the pleasant
consciousness that she had gripped her listeners.

"I went into the study this afternoon to fetch Miss Kennedy's
fountain-pen, and I found Hopscotch there--alone with a gentleman. I'm
afraid I surprised them."

"Did they look embarrassed?"

"Well, they both stopped talking, and stared at me while I hunted about
for the pen. _I_ felt embarrassed!"

"What's he like?"

"Middle-aged, with a moustache that's growing grey--not bad-looking on
the whole."

"It would be very suitable," decided the others.

They were trying to readjust their mental attitude towards Miss Hopkins,
and transfer her from the mathematical plane to the sentimental. To do
so required a wrench, but it was decidedly thrilling. They all suddenly
began to remember symptoms of incipient romance on the part of the
mistress.

"She wears a locket on her watch-chain. It's probably got his photo
inside," decided Ethelberga.

"And she always snatches up her letters in a frantic hurry," added Janet
sagely.

"Has she known him long?" asked Avelyn.

Irma nodded doubtfully.

"I should think it's probably quite an old affair. They may have been
boy and girl together."

"Perhaps they've been separated for years and years, and have only just
cleared up their misunderstandings," suggested Laura.

"Was he holding her hand?" asked Janet.

"N--no, I can't say he was holding her hand; but then, you see, I'd
knocked at the door first, and she'd said 'Come in!'"

"That would give them time," agreed Janet.

A silence followed, and the girls looked pensively at one another. The
atmosphere seemed charged with romance. The ringing of the first bell
for supper brought them back with a disagreeable thud to reality. They
had not yet changed their dresses, and a wild scramble ensued. Whether a
mistress in the bonds of Cupid would overlook such details as
unpunctuality was an experiment too risky to be tried. They passed on
their information in the course of the evening, and by 11.30 next
morning even the day girls had digested the news.

Miss Hopkins could not understand the changed attitude which the school
suddenly adopted towards her. There was an undercurrent of something
inexplicable. The girls gazed at her in form with a kind of tender
interest. If she toyed with the locket on her watch-chain, they visibly
thrilled. Once, when she dropped a letter from her pocket, Irma, who
picked it up, actually blushed as she handed it back. When the twelve
gates of Jerusalem were mentioned in the Scripture lesson, Laura Talbot
asked whether a jasper stone was ever used as an engagement ring in
Hebrew times. Being a practical, sensible sort of person, Miss Hopkins
decided that the war--that national bond of union--was bringing her into
closer touch with her pupils. The girls, meanwhile, were discussing a
possible wedding present, and wondering who would be her successor as
mathematical mistress.

Several of them were already beginning to work little good-bye souvenirs
for her. They hustled them out of the way in a hurry if she chanced to
come into the room. For at least a fortnight nothing happened, and
speculations were rife.

"Why doesn't she wear an engagement ring?" asked Mona Bardsley.

"Doesn't want to publish it yet, I suppose," opined Minnie Selburn.

"Do you think she'll be leaving at Christmas?"

"One can never tell."

"Has Tommiekins said anything?"

"Not a word."

One Thursday afternoon an event happened. Irma, looking out at the
fifth-form window, watched a masculine form walk up the drive and ring
the front-door bell. She instantly identified him with the stranger whom
she had seen in the study with Miss Hopkins.

"I knew him again in a moment," she assured the others. "I never forget
faces, and his was unmistakable."

The flutter among the boarders was immense. It was known that Miss
Hopkins was in the study interviewing the gentleman. Little Daisy
Garratt had been in the first-form room reworking a returned sum, when
the maid had entered and announced: "Mr. Judson is in the study, please,
m'm," and Miss Hopkins had risen immediately from her desk, and told
Daisy she might go, an opportunity of which that round-eyed junior had
instantly availed herself.

So his name was Judson! It was not highly romantic, indeed it suggested
gold paint; but after all, what's in a name? Everybody decided at once
that he had brought the engagement ring, and that Miss Hopkins, blushing
and conscious, would wear it upon the third finger of her left hand at
tea-time. They began to search about for suitable speeches of
congratulation. Several daring spirits, heedless of conduct marks, hung
about the hall, hoping to catch a glimpse of Mr. Judson as he said
good-bye. There was competition for front places at the windows that
overlooked the steps. Twenty interested pairs of eyes watched his
coat-tails disappear down the drive. There was much speculation as to
why he had not stayed longer, and what he was carrying inside his little
black bag. When Miss Hopkins came in to tea an electric wave of
excitement surged round the room, then broke in disappointment. Her left
hand was ringless. She seated herself in the most matter-of-fact
manner, and began to eat bread and butter and talk about the last air
raid in London.

Before preparation it had all leaked out. Mr. Judson was traveller for a
large firm of scholastic publishers, and on both occasions he had called
to interview Miss Hopkins about some new arithmetic books. She had
decided that they were suitable, and had ordered copies for the fifth
and sixth forms. That was the whole of the business. In the minds of the
boarders Cupid flew out of the window with a bang. He left blank
desolation behind.

"Were there only arithmetic books inside that little black bag?" asked
Mona disgustedly.

"It's too sickening when I'd nearly finished my pin-cushion cover!"
broke out Minnie Selburn.

"Mine was to be a nightdress case!" lamented Alice Webster.

The inmates of the Cowslip Room, as originators of the whole romance,
felt particularly flat. In disconsolate spirits they went to bed. It was
not nice to be told by Adah Gartley that they were silly geese, whose
heads were filled with a pack of sentimental rubbish. Their injured
feelings seethed, rallied, and finally bubbled up.

"There's something disagreeable about Adah!" remarked Janet tartly.

"It isn't only Adah, it's Joyce and Consie," corrected Laura.

"They deserve something for their nastiness!" ventured Ethelberga.

"Something strong!" agreed Avelyn.

Irma, half undressed, paused in the act of pulling off her stockings,
and made the important suggestion:

"I say, let's play a trick on the prefects!"

"What a blossomy idea!"

"They richly deserve it!"

"It would be just top-hole!"

"What could we do?"

"Ah, that's just the question, my good child!" said Laura, putting a
thoughtful finger to her forehead. "There's an art in ragging. It ought
to be done delicately. We don't want clumsy tricks, such as apple-pie
beds. As for booby traps, they're vulgar and dangerous; I wouldn't soil
my fingers with making one. It must be something that will annoy them,
but not harm them or anybody else. I haven't got a brain wave yet, but
perhaps ideas may come."

"Suppose we go and reconnoitre," proposed Avelyn.

"A very jinky notion. We might get an idea on the spot."

The four prefects slept in the Violet Room at the end of the passage.
They were allowed to sit up later than the rest of the school, and at
this moment were downstairs finishing some preparation. It was an easy
matter, therefore, to visit their quarters. Laura, Irma, Janet,
Ethelberga, and Avelyn made a dash down the passage, turned up the gas,
and began an inspection. The Violet Room was quite the prettiest of the
dormitories; it was also the largest, and had a round table and four
easy chairs with comfortable cushions. The table was spread with a
white cloth, on which were set forth four cups and saucers, a tin of
cocoa, a small basin of sugar, and a plate of biscuits. The prefects
were working overtime for an examination, and were allowed this special
indulgence to refresh their tired brains before they went to bed. They
boiled a tin kettle on a gas ring, and brought it upstairs with them.
They considered their nightly cocoa party one of their greatest
privileges.

"Looks jolly comfortable!" sniffed Avelyn, regarding the preparations
with envy.

"It's well to be a prefect!" agreed Janet.

"Shall we eat the biscuits?" suggested Irma.

"Certainly not!" replied Ethelberga.

Laura had taken up the cocoa tin, and was plunged in thought.

"I've got it!" she announced suddenly. "I don't mean the tin, but an
idea. Wait half a second for me!"

She dashed back to the Cowslip Room, and was away several minutes. When
she returned, her face beamed triumph.

"They won't enjoy their cocoa to-night!" she chuckled. "I've mixed two
teaspoonfuls of Gregory's powder with it! It will be a nice little
surprise for them, won't it?"

"Sophonisba! I should rather think so! I say, let's turn down the gas
and scoot. We shall have Miss Kennedy coming along in a minute."

The prefects came upstairs at ten o'clock, carrying their kettle. They
retired into their dormitory and shut the door. Two scouts from the
Cowslip Room, arrayed in dressing-gowns and bedroom slippers, presently
tiptoed down the passage, and listened outside. The door was thick, and
denied them the full benefit of the conversation, but they caught such
words as "cheek", "disgusting", and "abominable", so retreated
satisfied. They expected a storm next morning, but, rather to their
surprise, the prefects took no notice of the matter. Adah had decided
that it would be undignified to make a fuss.

"It will fall flat if we say nothing!" she urged.

"We'll just jolly well lock up our cocoa tin in future, though!"
announced Consie indignantly.




CHAPTER VIII

Spring-heeled Jack


If David Watson had not been notoriously careless and forgetful, the
events which will be narrated in this chapter might never have happened.
He was a bright boy, and well on in his form, but he had occasional
lapses of memory. In one of these he left his Latin dictionary in the
train. Now, if you are on the classical side of a large school, it is
not only a difficult but an impossible matter to get along without a
Latin dictionary of your own. To attempt to prepare your work by
borrowing your neighbour's book is like essaying to live on charity.
David realized this point immediately, and, instead of proceeding home
as usual by the 4.45 train, he turned into the town instead. There was a
second-hand book-stall in the market, which he thought might be worth a
visit. It had been recommended to him by one of the other boys, who
guaranteed the cheapness of its goods. Anthony, who stuck to David like
a Jonathan, went to help him to look.

"I've just eighteen pence in my pocket," admitted David. "But I may get
one at that. It needn't be a particularly spanky one. Miller got a
ripping atlas last week for one and two. He showed it to me. It only had
Norway and Sweden lost out, and a few of the maps blotted."

"I can lend you threepence," said Tony, "and you could leave your watch
or your penknife or something, I suppose."

The market was a large covered hall, containing rows of stalls of all
kinds. The boys heroically resisted the attractions of oranges,
chestnuts, and sweets, and made for the second-hand books. A pile of
these, all jumbled together, were marked:

    BARGAINS. EDUCATIONAL, 1_s._ each.

David and Anthony began to turn them over and look at them. They were
certainly an assorted lot. There were ancient geographies and grammars
dating back fifty or sixty years, catechisms of Scripture or history,
guides to knowledge, botanical questions, and even an odd volume or two
of sermons. A few of them were older still, and had long "S's" and calf
bindings. Regarded as educational ammunition, they were as antiquated as
flint-lock pistols. The boys rummaged among them for some time in vain,
but, at last, almost from the bottom of the pile, they disinterred a
fairly respectable Latin dictionary. It had lost its back cover and its
title page, but otherwise it seemed intact and clean. David took it to
the old man who presided over the stall, and tendered him a shilling. He
accepted it with reluctance.

"Didn't know I'd let this slip in among the bargains," he grumbled.
"It's worth two and six if it's worth a penny. It came with a lot of
other books from a good house. Well, I suppose, as it was among the
shillings, you'll have to have it. You may thank your luck I made a
mistake."

"A bargain's a bargain," said David, as he put the volume into his
satchel.

Trains to Netherton were not very frequent, and the boys had to wait
some time at the station. They sat down on one of the seats, and David
opened his satchel and took out the Latin dictionary. He agreed with the
old book-stall man that he had got it cheap, and felt decidedly
satisfied with his purchase. As he turned over the leaves, a letter fell
out on to the platform. Anthony picked it up. It was a square envelope
sealed with red wax, and addressed: "To my son, Leonard."

"Hallo," said Tony, "we've got hold of some chap's letter here!"

"Great Judkins! So we have!"

"Whom did the book belong to?"

David turned to the cover, and there, in rather faded ink, he found
written:

"George Reynolds, Parkhurst Academy, January, 1858."

He gave a long-drawn whistle.

"Here's a bit of stunt," he said. "Shouldn't mind guessing it belonged
to old Squire Reynolds."

"Pamela's grandfather?"

"You bet!"

"Was his name 'George'?"

"So Ave said. And Pam's father's name was Leonard."

"Then the letter was for him?"

"I suppose it was--only he's dead."

"What'll you do with it, then?"

"Give it to Pamela."

"What do you think's inside it?"

"Don't I wish I knew!"

"Suppose it's a will?"

"Exactly my brain wave. Wouldn't it be priceless if it left everything
to Pamela?"

"And turned old Hockheimer out of The Hall? Rather!"

"One never knows. I'll put it in my pocket, and give it to Pam to-morrow
morning."

The Watson boys sometimes overtook Pamela on the road to the station,
and every day they travelled by the same train to Harlingden. They made
a point of meeting her next morning, and David handed her the envelope,
explaining how it came into his possession.

"I suppose you couldn't open it and see what's inside?" suggested
Anthony.

Pamela looked doubtfully at the seal.

"I think I ought to give it to Mother," she said. "I expect she'll show
it to me."

"Don't let that precious uncle of yours get hold of it, that's all!"
warned David.

"No, indeed! I'll be careful."

"You'll tell us what it's about, won't you?" begged Tony the curious.

"If Mother will let me."

"Some day, perhaps, you'll be mistress of Lyngates Hall."

"No such luck!" declared Pamela bitterly.

Though she might disclaim any expectation of good fortune, the
remembrance of the letter nevertheless haunted Pamela all day long. She
kept feeling in her pocket to see that it was safe. In spite of herself,
bright fairy dreams floated through her mind, and mixed themselves up
with her lessons. Miss Peters had to tell her twice to pay attention.
She missed the explanation of a problem while she imagined herself
living at The Hall and riding a white pony, and got utterly wrong in
geology through planning how her mother should go up to London and buy
new clothes.

Dream castles are the most delightful of possessions. We build them
according to our own pattern, and live in them as our fancy pleases us.
Those more sober dwellings that fate sends us are never half so
beautiful, though we generally have to put up with them. The day seemed
longer than usual to Pamela. She hurried off at four o'clock, though her
train did not start till 4.45, and she only had to wait at the station.
She did not happen to see the Watson boys, for they ran up so late that
they had to jump into the guard's van, and at Netherton they went into
the booking office to enquire about a lost parcel.

Pamela walked home at a good pace, though the road was all uphill. Moss
Cottage, the little place which had been lent by Mr. Hockheimer to Mrs.
Reynolds, was not a particularly attractive residence. It was rather
dark and damp, and much shaded by trees. It had no beautiful view, such
as there was at Walden. Its front windows faced the road, and the light
was obstructed by a large "monkey-puzzle". Poor Mrs. Reynolds had made
everything look as nice as she could, and was busying herself in trying
to get the neglected garden back into a state of cultivation. She was
burning weeds when her daughter arrived. Pamela opened the door and
entered the sitting-room, where the table was ready spread for tea. She
took the precious letter from her pocket, and smiling with pleasant
anticipation, put it upon her mother's plate. She would tell her all
about it at tea-time, over the bread and jam. Smelling the burning
weeds, she ran into the garden. Mrs. Reynolds paused in her occupation
of forking fresh fuel on to the bonfire.

"Is that you, child? Then I'll go in and make the tea. How the evenings
are closing in! It will soon be dark when you get home. I wish you could
be a weekly boarder at school like Avelyn Watson."

"I don't! I'd far rather come back to you every evening, Mummie."

"I can't let you walk back from the station alone in the dark. I shall
soon have to begin to come and meet you in the afternoons."

"Oh, Mummie, it's too far for you! I don't in the least mind walking
alone. Shall I go and shut up the fowls now, or have you done it?"

"Not yet; so you may run and shut them up while I make the tea."

"You'll find a big surprise on the table, Mummie darling. Don't touch it
till I come, will you? I'll tell you all about it at tea."

"Very well," smiled Mrs. Reynolds, who was used to Pamela's little
surprises.

She was in the act of pouring on the boiling water when there was a rap
at the door, and her brother-in-law entered. Mr. Hockheimer generally
admitted himself in this fashion, without waiting for the door to be
answered--a lack of courtesy which invariably annoyed Mrs. Reynolds.

"I was passing, so I came for that parcel I left the other day," he
explained. "You put it by in the cupboard, didn't you? Yes, there it is.
I'll take it with me. By the by, have you any paraffin to spare? I
happen to want a little."

"I have some in the shed outside."

"Can you give me some in a bottle?"

"Yes, I'll go and fetch it."

Mrs. Reynolds placed the teapot to keep hot on the hob and left the
room. Mr. Hockheimer came over to the fire, and stood warming his back
and humming snatches from an opera. Presently his eye caught the letter
on the table. He picked it up, looked narrowly at the handwriting,
turned it over and examined the seal. Then he thought for a moment with
narrowed eyes. Finally he slipped the envelope into his breast pocket,
and, catching up his parcel, made his way outside to the shed.

"Is that bottle of paraffin ready?" he shouted. "I'm in a hurry, and
can't stay."

"It's here. I was just looking for a piece of paper to wrap it in,"
replied Mrs. Reynolds. "Won't you stop for tea?"

"Haven't the time to-day. Never mind any paper, I don't want to wait.
The bottle will do well enough in my pocket. I must be off now.
Good-bye!"

"Good-bye!" returned his sister-in-law, rather relieved at the shortness
of his visit. She washed her hands after pouring out the paraffin, and
came into the sitting-room, Pamela, who had been tidying herself
upstairs, entering at the same moment.

"I'm glad we've got rid of Uncle!" smiled the latter. "I heard his
voice, and kept out of the way."

"Naughty child!"

"Well, Mummie, I can't help it. You know I don't like him. I don't care
if we are dependent on him; what I feel is, that we oughtn't to be.
There, I won't upset you by talking of him. I've something else I want
to tell you. Why, where's the letter?"

"What letter?"

"The letter that I put on your plate. Mummie, what have you done with
it?"

There was an agony of apprehension in Pamela's voice.

"I haven't seen it, dear," replied Mrs. Reynolds. "Why, yes, I remember
now I did notice a letter lying on the plate when I was making the tea.
I was just going to look at it when your uncle came in. It's certainly
not there now."

Two red spots mounted to Pamela's cheeks, and her eyes blazed sparks.

"This is just about the limit!" she exploded. "There's not the least
shadow of a doubt! Uncle Fritz has stolen that letter!"

While these events were taking place at Moss Cottage, David and Anthony
Watson were walking home from the station. They had lingered at the
booking office, and had loitered on the platform to talk to some
friends, and, when they finally made a start, they determined to take a
path through the woods instead of keeping to the high road. There were
two motives for this decision. In the first place, the woods belonged to
the Lyngates estate, and, though the public had an old-established right
of way, Mr. Hockheimer objected greatly to the foot-path being used, and
had several times vainly tried to close it. The boys felt that they
would cheerfully go out of their way to annoy Mr. Hockheimer. They
almost hoped they might meet him, and, in imagination, stood firmly on
the path, discussing the legal aspect of the matter, and quoting the
ancient county map as their authority.

There was, however, another reason which led them from the high road.
During the last few days a curious and persistent rumour had circulated
in the neighbourhood as to a "something" that had appeared in the woods.
Whether supernatural or physical nobody knew, but several people
vouched for having seen it. Their stories, allowing a natural margin for
exaggeration, tallied wonderfully. The apparition wore dark clothes and
a black mask, and, instead of walking, careered along in a series of
mighty leaps and bounds. Owing to this extraordinary mode of
progression, it had been nicknamed "Spring-heeled Jack", and its
appearance had excited considerable terror. It was reported to be abroad
at dusk, and to haunt the more lonely portions of the woods.

David and Anthony, having a thorough boyish love of adventure, thirsted
to get a sight of this mysterious personage. They climbed the hill over
the quarry, therefore, and struck up through the woods, keeping at first
to the foot-path, but they encountered nobody, not even Mr. Hockheimer.
When you are out for excitement, it is disappointing to have a perfectly
tame and uneventful walk. In the thickest part of the wood they paused
with one consent.

"It's all bunkum about the trespassing! Let's go and explore!" tempted
David.

"Right you are!" agreed Anthony, succumbing as readily as Eve yielded to
the serpent.

It was a most interesting wood, with tall trees and smooth glades. It
undulated, and held crags here and there, so that you could never quite
see where you were going. The ground was strewn with acorns and beech
mast and horse-chestnuts, quite worth picking up. The boys wandered for
some little time, enjoying themselves immensely. They had no idea in
what direction they were going till they found themselves on the crest
of the hill. Behind them was the wood, but in front was a range of open
country looking towards the sea. They were standing on a platform of
rock, which shelved sharply down to a patch of gorse and heather.

"Jolly view here----" began Anthony, but stopped with his sentence
unfinished, for David suddenly gripped his arm and forced him on his
knees behind a bush. Somebody was walking at the foot of the rock, and
one brief glimpse had been sufficient to identify the plump figure and
blond moustache of their arch-enemy, Mr. Hockheimer. It would never do
for him to catch them so far from the foot-path. He might wish to settle
up scores with them. They remembered the gleam in his eye when he had
shaken his fist and said he would not forget. If they waited quietly he
would probably go, and then they would hurry back to the path.

But instead of going he waited, humming a tune. He was musical and fond
of operatic airs. There were other sounds, too, which the boys could not
understand. They grew curious and wanted to know what he was doing. They
dared not speak, but, agreeing by signs, they both crawled very
cautiously to the edge of the rock, and, concealed by some branches,
peeped over.

Mr. Hockheimer was exactly below them. He was kneeling on the grass, and
had evidently just untied a parcel. A large bicycle lamp lay on the
paper. In his hand he held a bottle, with the contents of which he
proceeded to fill the lamp. He felt in his pocket for matches, lighted
it, and placed it on a ledge of the rock. The dusk was falling fast, and
its glow shone brightly. From its position on the crest of the hill it
would be visible over miles of country, probably right out to sea. Mr.
Hockheimer hummed in a satisfied voice, as if he were pleased with
himself. He presently lighted a cigar; the fragrant smoke rose upwards
to the boys' nostrils. They could see him with extreme plainness, and
indeed could follow his every movement. He fumbled again in his pocket
and drew out an envelope, holding it in the glow of the lamp so as to
inspect it. David and Anthony gasped, for they recognized in a moment
the letter which they had given to Pamela only that morning. How had she
been so foolish as to allow her uncle to get hold of it? they asked
themselves. They were full of wrath at her stupidity. Mr. Hockheimer
turned over the envelope several times; he looked at the handwriting and
surveyed the seal, then he deliberately tore it open. He drew out a
piece of note-paper and began to read it. The boys, peering through the
brambles above, watched him narrowly, though they could not see the
document well enough to decipher it. Its contents seemed to disturb Mr.
Hockheimer. He said several untranslatable things in the German tongue.
Then he brought out his smart little silver box, hesitated, and struck a
match. The boys were in an agony of mind. He simply must not be allowed
to burn the paper. Sooner than that they would drop from the crag and
try to rescue it.

The wind had risen and blew out the match. For a moment they breathed
again, but it was only a temporary respite, for he immediately struck
another. He shaded it carefully this time, and, taking the paper,
applied the corner to the flame.

At that same moment a terrific and unearthly yell sounded in the wood
above. Mr. Hockheimer started and turned, dropping blazing letter and
match to the ground. There was a rustle among the bushes, and with an
enormous bound a dark figure sprang sheer from the rocks on to the
platform of grass, made a grab at the paper, seized it, put out the
fire, and leaped away with it into the gathering dusk of the undergrowth
below.

It happened with such extraordinary rapidity and suddenness that it was
all over in a flash, and the boys only caught a glimpse of a black mask,
and two long legs that hopped with the agility of a spider-monkey.
Considerably scared, they crept back from their position of vantage,
and, rushing through the darkening wood, managed to regain the pathway.
It was not till they had finally crossed the stile and got into the high
road that they began to compare notes.

"Well! We've seen it!" ejaculated David meaningly.

"What is it?" whispered Anthony in awestruck tones. "Teddy Jones says
it's Old Nick himself. It was terrible when it yelled!"

"Those legs were human," maintained David. "I can't guess who it is, or
how he manages to jump like that, but I bet he's not a spook."

Anthony, who inclined to the supernatural theory of the apparition,
shook his head doubtfully.

"Spook or not, he's no friend to old Hockheimer," added David.

"He's taken the letter--what was left of it."

"Only a bit was burnt."

"I wonder what was in it?"

"Something that Hun wanted safely out of the way."

"It must be Squire Reynolds's will!"

"Well, Spring-heeled Jack's got it, at any rate, and whether he'll ever
turn it up again is the question. If we could find out who he is we
might get on the track of it."

"We'll try, for Pamela's sake--though she's a bally idiot to let her
uncle take that letter!"

"It strikes me we've got on the track of something else to-night,"
continued David. "Did you notice that lamp?"

"Yes, I did."

"And where he stuck it?"

"Rather!"

"The light would shine right out to sea."

"And aeroplanes could see it too, from there."

"I've always suspected old Hockheimer. He ought to have been interned
long ago. I can't think why they let him be at large. The Government's
very lax with these Germans. If I were in Parliament I'd clear out the
whole set of them."

Anthony drew a long breath.

"We must watch him. Don't say too much to Pamela, in case the silly
goose blabs. Shall we tell her what we've seen to-night?"

"On the whole I think we'd better not. She hates him, and yet perhaps
she might not altogether want to get him into trouble. We'll go
cautiously, and hunt about, and see what more we can find out."

For a few days the boys purposely avoided Pamela, and she, on her part,
did not seek speech with them. She was intensely chagrined at the loss
of the letter, and did not like to acknowledge the humiliating fact to
them. She searched everywhere in the cottage, in case the wind might
have blown it from the table on to the floor, but it was not
forthcoming. Her mother vetoed the suggestion that Mr. Hockheimer had
taken it.

"Surely, dear, he would never be so dishonourable! You must have put it
somewhere yourself."

"But, Mummie, I know I didn't. And you said yourself that you saw it on
the table."

"It's very mysterious," sighed Mrs. Reynolds. "We might ask your uncle
next time he comes if he took it by mistake."

"He'd only deny it."

"Pamela, you misjudge him."

"I hate him, Mummie; he bullies us both."

"We're entirely dependent on him, remember. He gives us the whole of our
little income, and pays your school bills. We mustn't quarrel with our
bread and butter. What should we do if he were to turn us out?"

"I don't know. I sometimes think I'd rather be a crossing-sweeper than
take his money. Oh, life's horrid, and I hate it all! I wish we'd stayed
in Canada, and never come to England. Wait till I'm a little older,
Mummie, and I'll get a post as teacher, and work for you. I wish I were
twenty-one!"

"That's many years off, child, and in the meantime you've to get your
education. You must be civil to your uncle, Pamela."

"I will, on the outside, but I can't help my feelings inside. They're
boiling!" demurred Pamela, rather defiantly, scrubbing the corners of
her eyes with her handkerchief, and settling down to her lesson books.




CHAPTER IX

Concerns Day Girls


The Silverside boarders had what might perhaps be termed rather
"genteel" hockey practices on Saturday afternoons. They played
half-heartedly. They were not extremely keen, and they gleefully put off
play in favour of a walk or of the cinema. Isobel even broached the
suggestion that hockey was a rough game, but that was when she was
suffering from the effects of an ugly whack across the shins, and her
opinion was naturally biased. Consie's tastes were all for quiet, and
she would have spent her holidays over a book if she had not been
forcibly dragged out. Joyce would have preferred a dancing class on
Saturday afternoons.

In the meanwhile the day-girls' hockey club prospered exceedingly. They
had secured their old field, and had made fixtures with several other
clubs. Their elation over their successes did not tend to promote the
unity of Silverside. The school seemed more divided than ever.

In November came the Sale of Work. It was an annual affair held in aid
of a Children's Home, and the Silverside girls worked the whole year
beforehand for it. They considered it a great event. People in
Harlingden were kind in coming to buy, and generally quite a nice little
sum was cleared. As the time drew near, Adah began to make preparations.

"Will anyone who has contributions kindly bring them to me by the end of
the week?" she announced one day at "break".

"Why should we bring them to _you_?" asked Annie Broadside, with a glint
of battle in her blue eyes.

Adah's manner at once stiffened into the peculiar mixture of firmness
and patronage which she deemed it desirable to adopt towards day girls.

"Why? What a question to ask! So that they can be put on the stall, of
course."

"Thanks! But we'd rather arrange them for ourselves."

"You can't do that. The boarders always arrange the bazaar."

"But why, when _we_ make the things, should _you_ take them all and
arrange them? They're not _your_ work!"

Annie certainly had a most aggravating habit of asking questions. Adah
coloured with annoyance.

"I'm a prefect, you see!" she shuffled.

"There were no prefects last year, and you quote what you've always done
as your authority."

"Well, really, the few things the day girls have brought have never
mattered much before. I'll keep a space for you, if you're so
particular, and you can arrange them as you like, as long as you don't
spoil the general look of the stall," conceded Adah, with a show of
magnanimity.

"Thanks _so_ much, your Majesty! It's really most kind of you to keep a
little room for our poor contribution!" curtsied Annie, with mock
gratitude.

When the prefect's back was turned, she fizzed over to a sympathetic and
outraged circle. Adah's disdainful condescension was more than could be
brooked.

"The boarders have always had _the_ stall, and the day girls have humbly
helped!" said Gladys witheringly.

"How delightful for us!"

"They're to be the patricians, and we the plebeians!"

"They expect us to dust their very boots!"

"Look here," said Annie, "things are really getting beyond the limit. I
vote we get up a deputation, and go to Miss Thompson about this."

"What a brain wave!"

Miss Thompson listened, attentive and rather astonished, while the
deputation, very shy and red-faced, blurted out their request. She
tapped her desk thoughtfully with her fountain-pen, as if some new and
disturbing idea had suddenly risen on her horizon.

"Certainly there will be ample room for two stalls, and if the day girls
want to have one to themselves, I can see no objection. Arrange it just
as you like, and bring your own decorations. Yes, you may have a variety
entertainment in one of the schoolrooms, and charge admission, if you
wish. It will make extra money."

"You'll excuse our coming and asking?" apologized Gladys.

"I'm always ready to hear you, and to make any concessions that are for
the good of the school," replied Miss Thompson, gazing at the delegates
as if they provided her with considerable food for thought.

The deputation departed, feeling that they had scored their first real
triumph.

"Look here!" preached Annie to the Hawthorners, "we've just got to brace
up. The boarders may put what they like on their stall, but our stall is
going to be bigger and handsomer, and have far prettier things, and take
ever so much more money than theirs. Every single girl of you has got to
do her bit. There must be no slackers over this business."

The motive--if not strictly in accordance with the best
morality--appealed to the day girls. They responded gallantly, and set
all their home-folks working for the bazaar, as well as doing what they
could in their own spare time. They kept their activities strictly
secret from the ears of the boarders, but in private they compared notes
and rejoiced.

"The new Lady Mayoress is to open the sale," announced Gladys one day.

"Mrs. Parker? Why, surely she's aunt to little Violet Parker, isn't
she?"

"Of course she is."

"I'm going to get hold of Violet and be decent to her," nodded Annie
sagely. "She's a sweet kid. I see possibilities through Violet. By the
by, can you find me a copy of the Harlingden city arms?"

"It's a lion holding a broken chain. I saw it on a letter of Father's
the other day. I can easily get it for you."

"Thanks! I've got a blossomy idea."

The day of the bazaar was to be a whole holiday. The large schoolroom
was reserved for the sale, and the stalls were put up first thing in the
morning. The day girls had elected a committee of management, and six of
their number came to arrange their part of the fancy fair. They brought
flags, draperies, flowers, and pots of plants, and set to work to
decorate their stall. In the course of about half an hour it began to
look a most artistic production. The boarders, busy setting out their
wares at the other end of the room, cast surreptitious glances at it. It
was a humiliating fact for them, but they were forced to acknowledge
that it far surpassed their own efforts. They had never thought of a
canopy of white and gold, with a border of autumn leaves, or of
borrowing maidenhair ferns and forced Roman hyacinths.

But the decorations were only the beginning of the day girls' triumph.
Their committee soon began to unpack boxes and spread out goods, most
beautiful work of every description, which left their rivals gasping.
The day girls, living at home, had really had a much better opportunity
of asking their friends to help, and had made a very special effort.

Gertrude Howells's cousin had contributed various dainty articles in
poker work; Lucy Smith's elder sister, who was learning jewellery work
at the School of Art, sent some most artistic little silver brooches and
chains made by her own hands. Iris Harden's aunt gave Venetian beads and
foreign curiosities; Monica Golding's family had plaited raffia baskets
in barbaric, but most effective combinations of colour. Maggie Stuart
caused a sensation by producing little boxes of delicious toffee--yes,
real home-made toothsome toffee, in spite of the sugar rationing!

The boarders went on with their own preparations, and pretended not to
take much notice, but really the spirit was knocked out of them. They
had never expected the day girls to rise to such heights. They dressed
rather quietly for the festivities that afternoon.

The sale was to open early, and at half-past two Miss Thompson, in her
best voile dress, and with her most affable company manner, was
welcoming the Lady Mayoress, a smiling, florid, rather flurried
personage in velvet and rich furs, who had another function at half-past
three, and wanted to get away as soon as was politely possible.

"So kind of you to ask me," she fluttered. "I'm really interested in
schools--and education, you know. I'm afraid I'm not much of a speaker,
but--oh, yes, I'll just say a few words to open the sale. Kind? Not at
all. It's a great pleasure to me to come, I assure you."

The poor Lady Mayoress was new to her work, and palpably shy. Perhaps
she thought a crowd of schoolgirls an embarrassing audience. She hummed
and hawed and stammered a little in her speech, and glanced several
times at a piece of paper concealed behind her muff, but she
nevertheless managed to say something appropriate about the object of
the bazaar, and to wish it success.

"I am very pleased to declare the Sale of Work open," she concluded with
a sort of gasp, as if thankful that her duty was done, and smiled
nervously at Miss Thompson, whose convex eyeglasses had been fixed upon
her with appreciation during the speech.

"Perhaps you would like to look at the work now," murmured the
Principal.

"Oh, certainly! I'd _love_ to see it. What pretty things!"

And the Lady Mayoress, though she was standing within two feet of Adah
Gartley and Consie Arkwright, actually turned her back on the boarders
and made for the day girls' stall! Her eyes were fixed upon the central
object displayed there, a satin cushion with the city arms embroidered
upon it. She examined it with admiration.

"So beautifully done! And the colours are so effective! It will just
match my drawing-room. I shall be delighted to have it. How clever your
girls are, Miss Thompson! I suppose these are the prefects," smiling
graciously at Annie Broadside and Gladys Wilks. "My little niece tells
me about the school. She's so happy here."

"These are not our prefects," demurred Miss Thompson. "They are at the
boarders' stall. Perhaps you would like to look at some of their work,
too."

"Oh, with pleasure! Though I can't stay more than a minute. It's so
tiresome; I have another engagement, and mustn't be late. But I've time
for just a look, at any rate. Yes, the things are charming; they do the
girls credit, I'm sure! May I have this tray cloth and this tea cosy?
I'm so sorry to rush away, but I really must say good-bye."

The Lady Mayoress departed, feeling no doubt that she had successfully
accomplished a civic and social duty, and quite unaware of the storm she
had left behind. The boarders were staring at their prefects in shocked
sympathy. The whole business seemed almost incredible. That they, the
old-established original Silversiders, who had always in former years
run the sale of work, should be overlooked and passed over in favour of
mere upstart day girls, was little short of an insult to the school.

"She never even said 'How d'you do?' to Adah, and she shook hands with
Annie!" gasped Ethelberga to Janet.

"And she spent three times as much at their stall as at ours!"

"It's a shame!"

The boarders felt that the afternoon had opened badly, and subsequent
events did not tend to soothe their outraged feelings. Nearly all the
day girls had invited relations or friends, who naturally went first to
their stall to buy, with the result that the pretty things soon began to
be cleared, and the money-box to grow heavy. Miss Thompson, anxious to
preserve a due balance in affairs, did her best by taking her own
special visitors to buy from the disconsolate prefects, and the
mistresses also nobly purchased many totally undesirable articles, for
which they would find no possible use. If it had not been for this help,
the boarders' stall would have had a poor innings. As it was, they
barely scored one-third of the whole proceeds of the sale.

The Principal, in a pretty little speech next morning at nine o'clock,
spoke of the very gratifying results of the happy spirit of unity in a
school where all worked together for a good object, and the pleasure of
being able to send such a large cheque to the Children's Home. Adah,
with her eyes fixed on the bows of her shoes, listened grimly. It was
all nice enough, she thought, for head mistresses to make soothing
speeches, but boarders and day girls knew perfectly well that the
welding of rival factions at Silverside would not be accomplished yet a
while.

Quite apart from the warring of opposite parties, there seemed to be an
element of unrest in the school. Formerly the boarders had been quite
content to spend the leisure of their evenings at sewing, games, or over
some of their numerous guilds. Now, incited by the accounts of the day
girls, they were always asking to be taken in to Harlingden to concerts
or picture palaces. Miss Thompson considered that such expeditions upset
their preparation, and only allowed a very occasional outing. It was
irritating to the boarders to hear the day girls discussing various
entertainments, and to be openly pitied because they could not attend
them. The Cowslip Room in particular grumbled privately.

"We never go to anything!"

"Life's just a round of lessons!"

"There's the most gorgeous thing on at the cinema this week."

"I'd give my ears to see it!"

"It's not our turn this week."

"Strafe the wretched old turns!"

Miss Thompson, in her efforts to avoid too much dissipation, had
established a new rule, by which the dormitories in regular sequence
were allowed leave. Every Wednesday afternoon certain little parties of
boarders trotted off to the town under escort of a governess, doing
shopping and often visiting a _matinee_. No girl might go without
showing an exeat signed by the Principal. The chaperon-mistress was
expected to examine and file these permits before marshalling her flock.

On this particular Wednesday, Laura, Janet, Irma, and Ethelberga had set
their hearts on seeing "The Temple Bells" at the cinema. The fact that
they had duly had their turn a fortnight before, and had witnessed a
wildly exciting performance of "Love and War in the East", only made
them keener for more thrills. When Avelyn, a little tired of the
general atmosphere of lamentation, suggested palliating circumstances,
their wrath blazed out in her direction.

"It's all very well for _you_ to talk!"

"You can go on Friday evening or Saturday, if you like."

"You're half a day girl, after all!"

"You don't really sympathize with _us_!"

"All right! Don't get baity! As a matter of fact, I never come in to
Harlingden on Saturdays, so you've no need to envy me!"

"Envy you! Envy a _weekly_ boarder!" sneered Laura, with a whole world
of condescension in her voice. "My dear child, I think you really don't
understand what you're talking about! After all, you've only been at
Silverside two months!"

It is not a particularly pleasant matter to find the public opinion of
your dormitory dead against you. You are apt to get awkward knocks in
consequence. Avelyn put up with some very withering remarks that Tuesday
evening, and consequently felt sore.

"They're absolute blighters to-day," she thought. "I wish I could play a
rag on them! It would just serve them jolly well right!"




CHAPTER X

Mischief


Avelyn, I regret to say, was no ideal heroine of fiction, but a
particularly human girl, with a strong spice of mischief in her
composition. She considered that she owed her room-mates a grudge, and
she cast about for a suitable opportunity of paying the debt. As it
happened, fortune favoured her. Miss Kennedy sent her to the study to
fetch a book that was required. She knocked at the door, and as nobody
answered she turned the handle and went in. The room was empty. She
found Volume III of the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_, and as she turned
from the bookcase she cast an eye on Miss Thompson's desk. It was spread
with papers, and in front, just beside the inkpot, was a whole pile of
exeat forms. They were little printed sheets bearing the words:

    SILVERSIDE

    _I hereby certify that..............................is allowed
    leave of absence for the afternoon._

                             _Signed............................._

                             _Date..............................._

When a girl visited the town, she was given one of these forms, duly
filled in by the Principal, without whose signature it was not valid.
The system, perhaps, savoured of red tape, but it saved the mistresses
the trouble of enquiring from head-quarters who were to compose their
parties. Avelyn looked critically and covetously at the exeats. Each
represented so much fun to one girl. A sudden idea struck her. She
laughed aloud at the thought of it, and yielding to the impulse, counted
out four of the forms, and popped them into her pocket. Then she fled
back to the waiting Miss Kennedy with Volume III of the _Encyclopaedia
Britannica_.

Wednesday afternoons at Silverside were chiefly devoted to optional
subjects. The violin master came to give lessons, and several girls
whose spines were suspected of symptoms of crookedness, did special
physical exercises under the eye of a gymnastic teacher. The elocution
pupils met in the Sixth Form room, and learned to recite Shakespeare,
while those who were taking oil-painting wended their way to the studio.
Those unfortunates whose parents did not rise to "extras" were herded
together in the dining-room, regardless of forms, and did plain sewing
or printing. A band of privileged boarders, under guardianship of a
mistress, started at 2.30 for the dissipations of the city. Now at 2.15
Avelyn was due for her music lesson. She put her pieces and studies into
her case, washed her hands carefully, retied her hair ribbon, scented
her pocket-handkerchief, and sauntered down the corridor. She paused for
a moment at the door of the Fifth Form room, then entered. Laura Talbot
was sitting disconsolately on one of the desks, girding at life to a
sympathetic audience. Avelyn thrust the four exeat forms into her hand,
and remarked:

"For the Cowslip Room! And I've got to go to my music lesson! Isn't it
hard luck! Ta-ta! I'm late as it is, and Mr. Harrison gets baity if he's
kept waiting."

Laura stared at the forms for a moment, utterly staggered, then
incomprehension changed to joy, and she jumped from the desk.

"Irma! Janet! Ethelberga! We've got exeats! Oh, jubilate! Scurry quick
and get ready! We've only just time to change our things. Oh, I say! To
think of seeing 'The Temple Bells' after all!"

An agitated ten minutes followed, in which the four girls almost tumbled
over one another in the hurry of making their toilets. Laura put on her
best hat and birthday furs, Ethelberga sported a bracelet, Irma, after
foraging at the back of her top drawer, was distinctly seen to abstract
a powder puff and apply it to the tip of her nose, Janet tried to coax
her fingers into new gloves a quarter of a size too small, there was an
unlocking of cashboxes and a taking out of money. At the eleventh hour
they sped down the stairs into the hall. The little party of elect were
drawn up ready to go, and only waiting for Miss Peters. That lady had
been impeded in her dressing, and consequently came hurrying up, very
much flustered.

She was a gentle, fair-haired, middle-aged, depressed little person,
who had been pitchforked into teaching against her will. Her weak point
was discipline, and the girls knew it, and took base advantage. Now,
instead of forming an orderly crocodile, they clustered round her,
clamouring all sorts of requests for things they wanted to do in town.

"If there's time! Dear me, I don't know! I can't promise anything! It
will all depend!" replied the harassed mistress.

She collected the exeats and counted them automatically. In her flurry
she never noticed that four of them were not filled in with names or
signed. Laura had handed them to her without herself noticing the
omission. There was nobody to rectify the mistake, so the four
room-mates, in most exuberant spirits, started in the crocodile for
Harlingden. They accomplished a few purchases in the town, but poor Miss
Peters found it so difficult to keep her flock together, that she was
forced to abandon the shops, and suggested the cinema. She considered
her role of duenna anything but an enviable position, and would
willingly, that afternoon, have exchanged jobs with a charwoman. She
breathed more freely when she had piloted her lively young charges up
the stairs at the picture palace, and ensconced them in a giggling
double row in the balcony. For a blissful hour and a half they would be
out of mischief, with eyes fixed only on the marvellous scenes from
India.

Meantime, while Laura, Irma, Janet, and Ethelberga were staring
fascinated at the bewildering East, following the heroine through a
series of dazzling adventures, things at Silverside were taking a
prosaic and totally different turn. It happened that Irma and Janet,
whose French recitations that morning had been a dismal failure, were
due in the Fourth Form room that afternoon to say their returned poetry
lesson to Mademoiselle. She waited a quarter of an hour for them, then,
as they did not turn up, she instituted enquiries. Several reliable
witnesses informed her that they had been seen (and envied) departing
with the crocodile for Harlingden. Mademoiselle's temper was naturally
peppery, and under such provocation as this she burst forth in great
indignation:

"What! Go out to pleasure when I tell them to come and say lessons to
me! It is what you call the limit! Of what use to try to teach, if they
are to do only what they like? I go straight to tell Miss Thompson!"

Mademoiselle was brimming over with wrath, and poured out her complaints
vehemently in the study. The Principal's lips tightened as she listened.

"I did not give exeats to Janet and Irma. This shall be enquired into,
Mademoiselle," she replied.

Miss Thompson meant what she said. When the crocodile returned from
Harlingden, she was waiting in the hall, and ordered Laura, Irma, Janet,
and Ethelberga to report themselves in her study. The scene which
followed was short and stormy. The girls, whose minds had scarcely yet
become detached from Indian jungles and Hindoo palaces, were suddenly
accused of having played truant. They denied _in toto_, pleading that
they had exeats.

"Where did you get these exeats?" demanded Miss Thompson sternly.

"They were handed to us in the schoolroom."

"By whom?"

With one consent the girls hesitated. They did not wish to throw the
blame upon Avelyn.

"You refuse to tell me?" said the Principal. "Very well, you may go to
the First Form room, where your tea will be sent to you. I shall sift
the matter thoroughly after preparation. It is disgraceful that such a
thing should happen at Silverside."

When preparation was over that evening, the boarders were ordered to
assemble in the big schoolroom. They went in much astonishment,
wondering for what reason they were thus summoned. A whisper got about
that four girls were in trouble, but on what exact count nobody seemed
to know.

They had scarcely taken their places when Miss Thompson entered. She
looked worried and serious. A decorous silence pervaded the room.
Everyone was alert with expectation and intense interest. There was a
sensation as when thunder is in the air. After an impressive pause, the
Principal, standing so that her eyes scanned all the faces fronting her,
stated the case briefly.

"A thing has occurred to-day which has never happened here before. Four
girls went into Harlingden without leave. They tell me that they were
handed exeats by a schoolfellow, and believed that they had my
permission for the holiday. I have examined the exeats that were given
in to Miss Peters, and find that four of them are unsigned. I can only
conclude that somebody must have taken these exeats from my study. I
intend to find out who that person is. Can anybody give any information
on the subject?"

There was absolute stillness in the room. Every girl looked at her
neighbour. Avelyn sat as if petrified. Until that moment it had never
struck her that her practical joke might have any serious issue. She had
not expected her room-mates to believe that the exeats were genuine. She
thought that when they looked at them they would notice at once that
they were unsigned, and therefore not valid. It was incredible that Miss
Peters should also have accepted them. What was intended for a piece of
silly fun had assumed the aspect of a very grave fault.

"I will ask Miss Peters to tell us what she knows," said Miss Thompson,
turning to the mistress.

Miss Peters, much worried and embarrassed, could only state that she had
counted the exeats, which tallied with the number of girls she had taken
in to town. In her hurry she had not examined every paper, and could not
say whether they were signed or not. It was an unpleasant situation for
the poor governess. She was conscious that she had been slack in the
performance of her duties, and that it was owing to her negligence that
the affair had been possible. Though the Principal did not openly blame
her, she felt that she stood reproved before the school. Laura, Janet,
Irma, and Ethelberga sat overwhelmed and injured, but stubbornly
determined not to betray their room-mate. They felt that they would
rather take the blame themselves than sneak.

"I give you all one last chance," said Miss Thompson. "Can any girl
throw a light on this unfortunate affair?"

The head mistress spoke clearly and slowly. Her glance passed along row
after row of young faces, as if she would read their very souls. A
minute of ghastly quiet followed, a horrible minute that seemed as long
as a year. Then Avelyn rose. She was very pale, and stood erect with her
head thrown a little back.

"I think I can clear it up, Miss Thompson," she answered, in a voice
that was steady, but full of suppressed emotion. "It was I who gave out
those exeats."

"_You_, Avelyn Watson! And on what authority? From where did you get
them?"

"From your study table."

"_From my study table!_" repeated Miss Thompson, her manner growing
still more grave. "What were you doing in my study?"

Avelyn was thoroughly ashamed of herself, but she did not hesitate.

"I was sent to fetch a book. I saw the exeats lying on the table, and I
took four of them to give to the girls. I meant it as a joke. I did not
think they would believe they were real ones."

A murmur of amazement, almost a laugh, circulated through the room. Miss
Thompson checked it sternly.

"Do you understand, Avelyn Watson, what a liberty you have taken? You
were sent into my study for a certain purpose, and you took advantage of
the privilege of entering my room to peruse the papers on my desk, and
to steal--yes, I use the word deliberately--to _steal_ some of them. I
don't know how you view such conduct, but at Silverside we consider it
utterly unworthy of a lady. You owe me an instant apology."

Avelyn writhed under her mistress's scathing words. "I'm very sorry,
Miss Thompson. I never thought of it as anything but a joke. I apologize
most sincerely. I didn't mean to get anybody into trouble."

The Principal looked searchingly at Avelyn.

"You have been guilty of a very grave breach of discipline," she
replied. "I accept your apology because you have spoken up and
confessed, but I cannot let such an episode go unpunished. Until you
return home on Friday afternoon you are not to speak to a single girl in
the school. You will attend classes as usual, but you will take your
meals in the studio, and will sit alone there during recreation hours.
You are also prohibited from writing any letters, or taking any books
from the library. You may spend your time upon your lessons. Go to the
studio now, and your supper will be brought to you. I put every girl on
her honour not to speak or write to Avelyn Watson until next Monday."

Avelyn walked out of the room quite steadily, but with downcast eyes.
She had the feeling of one who has fallen suddenly into a pit. It was a
horrible experience to be there arraigned, tried, and found guilty
before all her companions. Miss Thompson's sarcastic comments hurt her
more than the punishment. She spent the rest of the evening alone in the
studio, and was left there half an hour beyond her usual bedtime. When
she went at last to her own dormitory the other girls were in bed, and
feigned to be asleep. Miss Kennedy came in first thing in the morning,
and told her that she must dress in the bath-room. All day long her
"Coventry" was preserved. The girls, indeed, cast surreptitious glances
of sympathy at her, but they were on their honour not to speak or write,
and they did not break their word. It was a hard penance to sit by
herself, without even a story-book to amuse her. She felt specially
lonely after four o'clock, when she knew her friends would be laughing
and chatting together round the fire, and perhaps roasting chestnuts.

The studio was not a particularly cheerful room for solitary
confinement. As the dusk closed in, the casts loomed like white ghosts
from the corners, and she could almost fancy that the eyes of the
plaster Venus deliberately winked at her. She had no matches, and nobody
came in to light the gas. She had not even the satisfaction of a fire to
poke, for the studio was heated with hot-water pipes. She did not
expect her tea to be brought to her before 5.30.

"If I weren't going home to-morrow I don't know what I should do," she
thought. "Thank goodness I'm only a weekly boarder! I do think they
might have come and lit the gas."

The room was getting more and more dim, and Avelyn's spirits fell in
exact ratio. She was beginning to feel an almost superstitious horror of
the plaster Venus. Suppose it were to come to life, like Pygmalion's
statue of Galatea? The bare fancy gave her shivers, and a sudden sound
made her turn with a start. It was nothing less than an unmistakable tap
on the outside of the window. Avelyn's nerves were strung at highest
pitch. She almost screamed aloud. Peering in through the darkness was a
face. She forced herself to approach and look, and with a revulsion of
feeling recognized the enquiring countenance of her brother David, with
his freckled nose pressed flat against the glass. He tapped again, and
she opened the window.

"Dave! You mascot! How did you get here?"

"Climbed up the spout!" chuckled David. "It was quite easy. Move out of
the way! I'm coming in."

He dropped inside the room, then turning to the window again, gave a
soft whistle.

"Tony's down below," he explained, "and he'll swarm up too, now I've
given him the signal. I'll just lend him a hand over that last piece of
coping. Here he is! Come on, old chap! We've struck the right shanty
after all. Told you you might trust your grandfather!"

Anthony made his appearance with equal caution. His round face was
wreathed in delighted smiles.

"It was a little difficult to fix exactly _which_ window," he
volunteered.

"But how did you know I was here?" asked Avelyn ecstatically.

"We met Pamela at the station, and she told us all about it. So, instead
of going home by the 4.45, we thought we'd come up and see how you were
getting on."

"We made Pam describe which room you were in," added David. "I say, it's
a bit of beastly bad luck for you! Pretty stiff, I call it, to be shut
up here!"

"It's too ghastly for words!"

"Cheer oh! We've brought you something. Look!" David felt in his pocket,
and produced a paper bag full of toffee and a copy of _Tit Bits_. "It'll
do to read. We'd have got you more, only we didn't happen to have much
money with us."

"It was lucky we met Pam before we got into the train," commented
Anthony. "We were earlier than usual at the station to-day. As a rule we
tear up at the last moment."

"It was ripping of you to come!"

"Well, we couldn't desert you, old sport, at such a pinch."

"I don't believe anyone could have such decent brothers." Avelyn gazed
at him through the gathering darkness with admiration.

At that moment a tread of footsteps and a rattle of crockery sounded in
the passage.

"Goody! It's my tea coming!" she gasped.

There was not time for the boys to make their exit through the window.
While the door handle was turning they fled to what cover they could
find. David took shelter behind the pedestal of Apollo, and Anthony
crouched in a corner among some drawing boards. Fortunately it was Miss
Dickens who entered, and Miss Dickens was short-sighted.

"Take this tray from me, Avelyn," she commanded. "Dear me, you're all in
the dark here! Has nobody been to light the gas yet?"

"No, Miss Dickens."

"I must fetch some matches, then. Be careful not to upset that tray as
you put it down."

The second her back was turned the boys flew to the window, and,
dropping out one after the other, made their way safely down the spout
into the garden below, whence they waved parting salutations, and
retreated with all speed. Avelyn had just time to hide the toffee and
the _Tit Bits_ before Miss Dickens returned with the matches and lit the
gas. She assumed an air of appropriate subjection and melancholy before
her mistress, which at the moment she certainly did not experience.

Until four o'clock on Friday her punishment continued. Not a single word
was exchanged between herself and her schoolfellows. She had never felt
so glad to go home. The week-end made a break, and when she returned to
school on Monday she found herself apparently forgiven at head-quarters,
and no more a black sheep, but an ordinary member of society. Her
room-mates' attitude was a mixture of admiration and gratitude.

"You're the limit, Ave!" said Irma.

"I'd never have thought of it myself," admitted Janet.

"It was such a topping idea!" chuckled Laura.

"And we all got just the very time of our lives at 'The Temple Bells',
thanks to you!" added Ethelberga.

"But I never intended it for anything but a joke!" protested Avelyn.




CHAPTER XI

Moss Cottage


Though Avelyn was happy enough as a boarder at Silverside, the real
focus and centre of her life lay at Walden. The little house, with its
romantic surroundings, had touched a very deep chord in her nature. Home
had been dear in Harlingden because it was home, but now it was a magic
spot, a palace of fairy dreams, a place where new and hitherto
undreamed-of interests and ideals had suddenly leaped into being. The
glamour of it seemed to begin when she stepped out of the train at
Netherton on Friday afternoons and started on her walk to Lyngates.
Different neighbourhoods seem to have different scents. This one smelled
of lichens and green ferns, and moist, warm, rain-splashed earth, a
half-pungent odour that she got used to directly, but which struck her
afresh each time as she returned to it. Every inch of the road had grown
dear to her, and she would welcome each clump of ferns or gurgling reach
of stream as if she were greeting old friends. After five days in the
prosaic, matter-of-fact, workaday, self-contained little world of
school, her week-ends seemed to belong to a different planet.

Avelyn was a girl who loved sometimes to be quite alone. She had a
favourite seat on the orchard wall among the ivy, where she would curl
herself up with her back against an apple tree and watch the landscape
below. So changeful and wonderful were the effects of storm and sunshine
over this valley, that it never looked for one half-hour the same.
Sometimes there would be sunrise tints of rose and violet, sometimes a
soft yellow haze, sometimes storm-clouds would roll from end to end, or
perhaps a magnificent rainbow would span the gorge like an ethereal
bridge, or, grander still, the lightning would flash its wicked forks
over the hills from summit to base, gleaming against a background of
inky darkness.

The very air at Walden seemed softer than at Harlingden. It was a mild
autumn; leaves lingered long on the trees and made the woods gorgeous,
and traveller's-joy hung in exuberant masses over the hedgerows, like a
soft silver cloud trying to veil the growing bareness beneath.

One Saturday early in December Avelyn started off to see Pamela. It was
some distance to Moss Cottage, and, instead of walking by the high road,
she meant to take a path that led up the gorge and across the hill. It
was a glorious morning; a grey wind-swept sky showed, here and there,
bright patches of blue between the masses of heavy clouds that were
rolling down from the hill-tops like smoke from a cauldron, and fitful
gleams of sunshine, bursting out in wonderful brilliance, made
marvellous effects of light and shadow. The river, winding slowly
through the marsh lands, was now vivid blue, now inky purple, as it
reflected the clouds or the sunshine; a mass of larch-clad hill-side
showed dark in contrast to the red of the ploughed field on its summit,
which was catching the light descending in rays from one bright patch
above. In a few moments all had changed: the larches were tipped with
gold, the marsh lands were purest emerald, and the hills veiled in filmy
mists floating like threads of gossamer down the slopes. Avelyn turned
from this wide prospect and plunged up the glen, with her face towards
the hill whence the mist was rolling. Ages ago a glacier must have
slidden down there, and left its mark on the huge boulders which lay
scattered everywhere around. Over this rough bed a stream, swollen by
days of incessant rain, thundered along, its brown, peat-stained waters
churned to the whitest spray as it forced its way in leaping cataracts
over the rocks. Stepping-stones, which could be easily crossed in July,
were deep under feet of foam, and the lower boughs of the trees were
washed and swayed by the flood. It was so sheltered that the gale, which
had stripped the leaves on the hill-side above, had spared enough here
to tint the gorge with gold and brown. Some of the oaks were still
green; a birch displayed the purest Naples yellow; low-growing mountain
ashes and alders had kept their summer clothing intact, and the thick
undergrowth of briar and bramble was verdant as ever. Even more
beautiful, perhaps, were the bare boughs of the hazel copse, the
exquisite tender shades of which were such a subtle blending of purples
and greys as to defy the most cunning brush that artist ever wielded,
and, contrasted with an occasional pine, or holly, or ivy tree, made a
dream of delicate colour.

The boulders were almost completely covered with vivid green mosses, in
sheets so thick and deep and compact that a slight pull would raise a
yard at a time. Here and there among them were tiny bright red
toadstools, or some of the larger purple or orange varieties that had
lingered on since October. On a hazel twig Avelyn found the curious
birds'-nest fungus, with its tiny eggs packed neatly inside. The day was
so mild that a squirrel was taking a whiff of fresh air, waving his
feathery tail from a fir tree overhead, but at the sight of a human
being he disappeared suddenly into a hollow in a big tree, where no
doubt he had established cosy winter quarters. There were few
birds--perhaps they did not like the dampness or the roar of the
water--but Avelyn caught sight of a dipper darting down the stream, a
flight of long-tailed tits twittering noisily for a moment or two on a
tree-top, and a heron sailing majestically towards the mountains. On the
brambles the unpicked blackberries still hung ripe, though so absolutely
sodden and tasteless that they were not worth the eating; there was even
a spray of blossom left here and there. A branch of scarlet hips shone
brightly in the sunlight; the birds, sated with yew berries, had spared
it thus far, and it rivalled the holly on the bush close by, while
trails of bryony berries repeated the colour with varieties of lemon
and orange. There were a few wild flowers, even in December--a belated
foxglove, a clump of ragwort, a blue harebell, or a stray specimen of
buttercup, campion, herb robert, yarrow, thistle, and actually a
strawberry blossom. The tall equisetum lingered on the boggy bank, and
ferns were everywhere green; great clumps of the common polypody clung
to the tree-trunks and flourished on boughs high overhead, and under the
rocks grew the delicate fronds of the English maidenhair, or the rarer
beech fern.

Avelyn had at last reached the waterfall. The great white cascade leaped
over a ledge of rock, and dashed with such thundering force into the
pool below that all the air around was filled with floating mist on
which the sun formed a dancing rainbow. As each neighbourhood has its
own distinctive scent, so each stream has its own peculiar sound, as if
it would give us some message that it has no words to convey. The little
gurgling brook tries to tell us cheery things; the slow-flowing river
has a sadder story; the trout stream babbles kindly hopes. To Avelyn the
leaping, rushing cascade, with its whirl of living, dashing foam, seemed
to be calling out in a voice that rose and fell with the roar of the
waters: "Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company
of Heaven, we laud and magnify Thy glorious name".

She stood a long time gazing at the foam and the mist and the rainbow,
then she turned and plunged up among the trees to the head of the glen.
Looking back she felt as if she had held Nature, or something bigger
than Nature, tight by the hand.

From the top of the gorge was an easy walk across fields to Moss
Cottage. In spite of the bright morning the little house looked gloomy
among the trees. It always struck Avelyn with an air of extreme
melancholy. She was almost morbidly sensitive to impressions. She
decided that she would not go to the front door, because she would then
be certain to see Pamela's mother, and somehow she felt rather
frightened of poor, quiet, retiring Mrs. Reynolds. She knew that her
friend would probably be at work in the garden, so she tacked into the
wood and climbed the palings at the back. Only half of the ground behind
the cottage had as yet been brought into cultivation, and the part where
Avelyn descended was still a wilderness. There were large rocks and
tangled masses of brambles, and faded clumps of ragwort and teasel, and
yellow bracken stumps. Not far away, however, was a newly-dug border,
with a spade lying on the ground, and Pamela's hat. Pamela herself was
not to be seen, but surely she must be somewhere near. Avelyn prowled
about in search of her. She did not want to go up to the cottage, and
decided that if her friend were indoors she would wait until she came
out again. Possibly she might be in the hen-house. That was certainly an
alternative. She had heard Pamela mention hens. In the distance some
roofs were visible which looked like outbuildings. She went to
investigate. Right in the far corner of the garden, almost indeed in the
wood itself, and thickly embedded in trees, she came upon a ramshackle,
tumble-down, two-storied kind of stable. A giant oak, shrouded with ivy,
stretched out long protecting arms and almost hid it from view; the roof
was built against the very bole of the tree, whose branches sheltered
the windows. Was Pamela here? Avelyn gave a long coo-e-e and called her
name. The next moment a startled face looked out from the upper window.

"Hallo, Pam!" shouted Avelyn gleefully, "I've unearthed you at last, old
sport!"

"Wait a sec. I'll come down," returned her friend in a cautious voice.

Pamela appeared from out the stable door, with a rainbow face in which
storm and sunshine seemed to be struggling.

"I never expected to see you, Ave! Have you dropped from the skies?"

"No, climbed over the palings. I thought I'd be sure to find you
somewhere about in the garden. I saw your hat, and went to look for
you."

"Yes. I was gardening."

"Is this your hen-house?"

"No, it's not the hen-house, it's--just a kind of stable."

"It reminds me of the Swiss Family Robinson, or Robin Hood's shanty in
the depths of Sherwood Forest. You could climb up that tree if you got
on to the roof."

As Avelyn's eyes glanced up the bole of the huge oak Pamela's followed
with a look of strained anxiety. She laid her hand on her friend's arm
and drew her inside the stable. She seemed ill at ease.

"What's the matter, Pam?"

"Oh, nothing!"

"You're not yourself at all."

"Yes, indeed I am."

"I don't believe you're pleased to see me!"

"Ave! I've been dreaming of you all the morning."

"Then what is it?"

Pamela was silent.

"Something's worrying you. I can see that plainly enough."

"Yes. I own I'm worried."

"Won't you tell me?"

"I can't."

"Is it a secret?"

"It is just at present. I want to think it over."

While she spoke Pamela kept glancing anxiously out at the door. She
suddenly turned with frightened eyes.

"Ave! Uncle Fritz is coming! You must hide, quick! He mustn't catch you
here for all the world! Run behind this stall. Don't move till he's
gone."

[Illustration: AVELYN, CROUCHED UNDER THE MANGER, COULD HEAR THE
BULLYING TONE IN HIS VOICE]

She hustled Avelyn into the darkest corner of the stable, then herself
sat down on the foot of the ladder that led to the floor above. A sound
of footsteps brushing the grass was heard from outside, and in another
moment Mr. Hockheimer entered.

"What are you doing down here?" he asked sharply. "I told you to stop
upstairs."

"I've only just come down."

"Any message?"

"No, none at all."

"One might come just when you are fooling about here," he frowned. "Why
don't you do as I tell you?"

Avelyn, crouched under the manger, could not see his face, but she could
hear the bullying tone in his voice.

"Do you think I feed you and educate you for you to do just as you
like?" continued Mr. Hockheimer angrily. "What would become of you if it
weren't for me, I should like to know? Another time when I set you to do
anything you'll do it, or I'll know the reason why. Here, get up and let
me pass!"

He pulled her roughly off the ladder and walked up himself. His
footsteps creaked on the boarded floor above, then all was silence.
Pamela crept softly up the ladder, peeped into the room above, and
descended as quietly as she came; then, crossing to the stall where
Avelyn was hidden, put her finger on her lips for silence and beckoned
her friend towards the door. She led her hurriedly along the garden.
Neither spoke a word till they reached the palings.

"I'm awfully sorry I came, Pam!" apologized Avelyn.

"Never mind, you couldn't help it. How should you know Uncle Fritz would
be here?"

"I certainly shouldn't have come if I had known."

"Who would? Ave, have you ever seen a little wild linnet get into a
bird-catcher's net?"

"No."

"I have. It runs and struggles and beats its wings, and the more it
tries to escape the worse it gets caught in the meshes. Ave, at present
I feel like that linnet."

"Can't I help you, Pam?"

"Not yet. I want to think. When I really feel you can help me, I shall
come and ask you. You wouldn't fail me?"

"I'd help you for all I'm worth, if it's against your uncle."

Pamela's eyes filled with tears.

"I'm so utterly alone," she faltered. "Mother doesn't understand. Since
Father died she has never cared for anything. She's content to live here
on Uncle's bounty. She's so absolutely trusting and unsuspicious, just
like a child. I never can get her to see things as I do. Although I'm
hardly fourteen, I often feel that I know more of the world than she
does. Just at present Mother is going about with her eyes closed."

"And you?"

"I'm keeping my eyes particularly wide open, and my mouth tight shut,"
replied Pamela, as she kissed her friend good-bye and helped her to
climb the palings.

Avelyn went home very thoughtfully. She found the boys digging in the
kitchen garden, and confided to them her morning's experience. They
decided that something mysterious must be going on at Moss Cottage.

"It looks fishy!" said David, slowly scraping the earth off his boots
with the edge of his spade.

"What has that old Hun got up his sleeve?" enquired Anthony, shaking his
head.

"I don't know. After what we saw in the wood I'd believe anything of
him."

"Shall we tell the Vicar, or somebody?" suggested Avelyn.

"No! no!" protested David emphatically. "Whatever you do, Ave, for
goodness' sake don't blab! We've no proper evidence yet, and if stories
begin to get about the village he'll know he's suspected, and he'll be
careful. Just you leave this to me. It's my first 'case', and I want to
worry it out. Remember, I'm going to be a barrister some day, when the
war is over, if I don't go out to France first and get killed. Old
Hockheimer's deep, but he doesn't know we're watching him. Two British
boys ought to be a match for a German!"

"I'd shoot him first and watch him afterwards if I had my way," declared
Tony bloodthirstily.

It was on that very same afternoon that a fresh planet swam into the
Watson horizon, or, in other words, that they made a new acquaintance.
The Vicar was distinctly responsible for it. He was standing at the top
of the churchyard steps, talking to a somebody, the toe of whose boot
alone was visible round the corner, and when he saw Anthony passing in
the road below he beckoned to him. Tony mounted the steps, and found
that the boot belonged to a young officer in khaki, who stood with his
hands behind his back contemplating the tombstones.

"Hallo, sonnie!" said the Vicar affably. "Doing anything special this
afternoon? This is Captain Harper, who's in charge of the camp near the
river. He wants to go and see the Roman fort on the top of Weldon Hill,
and he doesn't know the way. Have you time to take him?"

Anthony's grey eyes scanned the Captain's dark ones for one searching
moment, but in that moment he loved him, and would have offered to act
guide to the top of Mount Everest if required.

"I'd like to go," he volunteered. "You don't mind David coming too, do
you?"

"I don't know who David is, but let him come, by all means!" smiled the
officer. "Thanks very much, Mr. Holt, for finding someone to 'personally
conduct' me!"

So it happened that David and Anthony started off with Captain Harper,
and by the time they had reached the Roman Camp they had decided that
they "liked him awfully", and when they returned to Lyngates they felt
as if they had known him for years. They talked about school, and
football, and fishing, and treacling for moths, and a great many other
interesting topics, and he told them a little about his experiences at
the front, and how he had been wounded.

"How long have you been at Netherton?" asked Anthony as they paused by
the gate of Walden.

"About six weeks."

"I wonder we've not seen you before."

"I've been very busy with my work. Is this where you live?"

"Yes. Come in and see Mother, won't you?"

Captain Harper's glance swept the front of the picturesque little house,
and finally rested on the patch of ivy-covered wall where Daphne, a
bewitching, hatless vision, with the sunset gleaming on her bronze hair,
stood with unconscious profile turned towards them, planting snowdrop
bulbs in the crannies.

"If she won't think I'm intruding," he replied diffidently.

But the boys had him each by an arm, and were hauling him in by sheer
force.

"Mother's not one of those horrid stuck-up people who'll offer you two
fingers to shake, and wither you up. Just come and speak to her, and
judge for yourself."

"Mr. Holt calls her the very soul of hospitality," declared Anthony
impressively.




CHAPTER XII

"Lady Tracy's At Home"


During almost the whole of the term the Dramatic Society had flourished
among the boarders. That is to say, the prefects had chosen a play, had
taken the best parts for themselves, and had allotted the minor parts to
those girls who were fortunate enough to be their favourites. The
particular piece they had selected was named "Lady Tracy's At Home", and
included a large number of characters. Many of these were only in the
nature of "supers", and had no words to say; others had a few short
speeches. All the main action of the play centred on six principals, who
were represented by the four prefects, with Muriel Knighton and Mabel
Dennis, also members of the Sixth Form. There had been endless
rehearsals. Adah, as stage manager, was extremely particular, and
drilled her company remorselessly.

"We've got to make it a good show this time," she assured them.
"Remember, we're a big school now, and we shall be acting to a large
audience. I expect those day girls will be fairly critical, so we
mustn't give them any opportunity to find fault. Let's show them we know
how to act."

"They used to have plays at their old school," volunteered Consie.

"I suppose they did, but I dare say they weren't up to much. You see, as
they weren't boarders, they couldn't have had proper time for
rehearsals, and perhaps didn't think out their costumes as we're doing."

"Very likely they only took Shakespeare or scenes from Dickens, or
something tame of that kind," nodded Isobel.

Miss Thompson had allowed the Dramatic Society a certain wideness of
choice, so they had abandoned the classics, which seemed to savour too
much of the schoolroom, and had selected an entirely modern and
up-to-date comedy. In their eyes it was going to rival a piece from the
real theatre. They had all seen up-to-date acting, and had their ideals
of what a comedy ought to be.

"You must try to live in your parts beforehand, so that you catch the
spirit of them," counselled Adah. "I've heard that Ellen Terry and Sarah
Bernhardt always did that. It was the secret of their success. Throw
yourself into your character till you entirely realize it."

"I suppose that's the artistic temperament," agreed Consie. "It would be
gorgeous to take up the stage as a career, wouldn't it?"

"The stage of the future is going to be a School of Education for the
People," moralized Adah. "Conscientious and cultured actresses will be a
want."

"Miss Hopkins says Nature never creates a vacuum," ventured Joyce.

"Trust Mother Nature! If there's a want, she'll send someone to fill the
gap."

"Only, of course, they've got to train themselves. There's nothing like
beginning when one's young. And having the wish is half the battle."

As a result of this serious interest in dramatic culture, the character
of the six "principals" underwent sudden and astonishing changes.
Isobel, erstwhile a rather shy and retiring maiden, put on a perkiness
and a coy assurance very puzzling indeed to anybody who did not know
that _pro tem._ she was Miss Diana Davenport, the beautiful, dashing,
fascinating Society debutante, who was breaking the hearts of young and
old in fashionable Mayfair. She practised casting a glamour over people
and glancing from under veiled lashes, and succeeded fairly well with
those who understood and played up, but indifferently with Miss Hopkins,
who asked her if she were suffering from an attack of indigestion, and
whether a dose of sal volatile would relieve the pain. Muriel, whose
role was that of Diana's rejected lover, Lord Darcy Howard, went about
endeavouring to remember that she had a broken heart. She sighed
frequently, kept an expression of yearning in her eyes, and smiled a
sad, wan smile, fraught with memories. She maintained a calm, yet
melancholy dignity, befitting one who is singled out by fate for
disappointment, heroism, and an early grave. It was really a very
difficult part for Muriel, whose natural tastes inclined to a more
sporting character, and she would have preferred to act a comic Irish
servant; but Adah assured her that it was useless to think of the stage
unless she was prepared for all emergencies, and could take any role
that might be offered her. Adah herself, as Lady Tracy, had blossomed
into a loquacious, clever, manoeuvring, brilliant hostess, much set on
worldly advantages, and immediately concerned with the due disposal in
life of her daughter Marigold. Adah's manner had always been rather
consequential, now it surpassed itself, and she swam about the school
as Queen of Society. Mabel, as Marigold, schooled herself to extreme
innocence. She would practise making round eyes and an engaging pout
as she lisped out: "But, Mother dearest, what is the great big world
really, really like?" After many rehearsals, she succeeded in sidling
bashfully into a room, and extending a timid hand without relapsing
into laughter. Consie, the dashing _debonnaire_ hero of the piece, had
an easier task. It was comparatively simple to stride about paying
flowery compliments and carrying all before her. She soon acquired an
irresistible manner, and a habit of flinging herself lazily into
arm-chairs and toying with an imaginary watch-chain. She succeeded so
admirably, that when she wore her costume at dress rehearsal, some of
the girls almost fell in love with her. To Joyce, as the villain, fell a
harder lot. It is difficult to live the part of a villain consistently
for weeks. At rehearsals, much coached and chivied by Adah, she would
slink and frown and bite her finger-tips and look daggers, and throw
sarcasm into her voice, but off the stage she would relapse at once
into the comfortable, easygoing, happy-go-lucky ways which usually
characterized her personality. She was a sore trial to Adah.

"If you'd ever seen 'Shylock' or 'Mephistopheles', you'd have a better
idea," urged the head girl. "You're not nearly bold and bad enough,
somehow. We'll give you a dark wig and a curled moustache, and that
paper cigar, and you must grind your teeth when Lord Archibald taxes you
with the conspiracy."

"Will the audience hear me grinding them?" asked Joyce helplessly.

"Of course not, stupid! But they'll see your mouth move."

"If the moustache doesn't cover it."

"We'll take care it shan't. Can't you manage to look like 'Gentleman
Jim' on the cinema when the detective caught him with his hand inside
the safe?"

"I'll try; but how long must I go on looking like that? In the cinema
they whisk on to the next picture in half a second, but on the stage
I'll have to stand there, and I don't feel inclined to grind my teeth
for five minutes. I hope that tweed suit will fit!"

All the performers felt their costumes to be their last resource,
supplying any deficiencies in the acting. They were determined to be
ultra-fashionable, and sent home for suitable garments. Adah secured a
perfect dream of a dress in grey voile trimmed with sequins, and a silk
petticoat that rustled as she walked. They lent an added graciousness
and seal of society to her impressive manner. Isobel borrowed a toque,
and a veil with spots, and a feather boa, and a pair of tan boots with
high French heels, and a large cameo brooch, and a vanity bag, and
looked dashing enough to break the heart of the most hardened and
deliberate woman-hater who ever trod the boards. Her companions, gazing
at her bewildered, assured her that she looked at least twenty-one, if
not more. The way she stretched out a dainty gloved hand and murmured
"How d'ye do?" was considered a triumph of acting.

"If we do it really well, of course, we might be asked to give it over
again," Adah confided modestly to her fellows.

"Here?" asked Isobel.

"Well, not necessarily. Sometimes managers lend theatres for charities."

"An amateur play generally makes a heap of money!" opined Joyce.

"It would be lovely to act it in a real theatre!" gasped Mabel.

"The Harlingden Operatic Society cleared thirty pounds for the hospital
by the 'Gondoliers'," volunteered Consie.

In imagination the Silverside Dramatic was already emulating this
gratifying example. They could picture their appearance on the boards of
the Prince of Wales Theatre before a distinguished audience, including
possibly the Mayor and Mayoress. Meantime they expected quite a crowded
audience in the big class-room, and made grand preparations. The
performance was to be on the last Wednesday afternoon of term at four
o'clock. It was a custom as old as the school. The day girls had always
been invited to attend, and this year Adah pinned up the usual
announcement on the notice board. She saw Annie and Gladys sniggering
over it, but set that down to their general lack of manners. She hoped
what they were going to see would duly impress them. They would surely
be proud to belong to a school that could get up such a dramatic
entertainment.

The performers were allowed to stop lessons at 3.15 in order to change
their costumes, and, after a tremendous amount of breathless work in the
way of dressing, accomplished their toilets to their own and everybody
else's satisfaction.

"You look A1," said Adah to Muriel. "If you don't absolutely take the
house I shall be really astonished."

Lord Darcy laughed nervously. His clothes were immaculate, but not very
comfortable. He showed decided symptoms of stage fright. Joyce, as the
wicked earl, was anxious about the set of her wig. It was rather too
large, and exhibited a tendency to tilt over on one side unless she held
her head very stiffly erect, an attitude that did not correspond with
the sinuous, snake-like poses which she had practised as appropriate for
the villain of the piece.

"My moustache makes my upper lip quite stiff. I'm sure I speak funnily,"
she fluttered.

"No, no, you're all right! I'll tip you a wink if your wig gets crooked,
and you can push it straight. Consie, you look an absolute bounder in
that blue tie! If I were Marigold I should prefer the villain instead of
falling into your arms."

"Many thanks!" said Lord Archibald, regarding himself in the mirror with
satisfaction. "As you're to be my prospective mother-in-law you ought to
appreciate me better!"

"It's high time we began," urged Mabel.

"I'll take a look and see that everything's ready," said Adah.

She ran to the platform and held a hasty review of the stage properties.
Yes, all was arranged exactly as she wished. Minnie and Alice had done
their duty. From the other side of the curtain came the sound of
talking. She could not resist a peep at the audience and applied her eye
to a small chink. What she saw made her gasp. Instead of a whole
schoolroomful of people only the three front rows of seats were
occupied. Much disturbed she rushed back to the dressing-room, and,
calling Mona Bardsley, who was acting prompter, sent her off as scout.

"Go and find out why they're not ready, and tell them to hurry up and
take their places or we shall begin without them," she commanded.

Mona was away some little time. She returned looking decidedly blank.

"They say they're ready and waiting, all those who are coming."

"But the room's only a quarter full! Where are the others?"

"The day girls have nearly all gone home."

"Gone home! Didn't they understand we'd invited them?"

"Oh, yes, but they said they'd rather not stay."

Adah's face was a study.

"Do you mean to say they don't care about seeing our play?"

"So it seems."

"The slackers! They've just done it on purpose, out of spite. Well, if
this isn't the meanest thing I've ever heard of! How perfectly
sickening!"

The injured performers received the bad news with much disgust, but
their grousing was cut short by the arrival of a fourth-form girl with a
message.

"Miss Thompson says, will you please begin at once, because it's getting
very late?"

There was nothing for it but to go through the piece with the best grace
they could, before an audience of mistresses, boarders, and about ten of
the old Silverside day girls. It is poor work playing to an empty house,
and they felt that half the spirit had gone out of the performance.
Adah's manner was not nearly so gracious and impressive as at
rehearsals, Lord Darcy got confused and mixed up his speeches, and
Marigold giggled palpably when she ought to have been looking love-lorn.
As for the wicked earl, his black moustache dropped off just when he was
in the very midst of his villainy, and spoiled his best point. The
Principal and the mistresses clapped their hardest, and so did the rest
of the scanty audience, but everybody felt that the whole affair had
been a fiasco.

"It was very nice, my dears!" said Miss Thompson, congratulating the
disconsolate actresses as they came in to tea afterwards. "Quite one of
the best plays we've ever had here."

"She means kindly, but she knows it was a failure," whispered Adah
gloomily to Consie. "I'll never forgive those day girls!"




CHAPTER XIII

Reports


Avelyn was looking forward with wildest joy to the Christmas holidays.
There were so many things she intended to do at home. She and Daphne and
the boys were all going to set to work to construct chicken coops in
preparation for the hatching of clutches of eggs that would be put down
in January. Then, if the weather kept open, there were wonderful
improvements to be made in the garden, stones to be brought for a
rockery, and ferns to be fetched from the stream to plant upon it, to
say nothing of the vegetable culture which in these days of food
shortage was the main feature of their outdoor activities.

Avelyn's whole heart was at Walden. She had grown to love every corner
of it with an intense clinging attachment. No place in the world was so
precious as those few acres of land she called home. The prospect of an
entire glorious month there filled her with bliss.

"L'homme propose et Dieu dispose", however, and our best-made plans have
a knack of "ganging agley". On the Thursday before the holidays Anthony
broke out in spots, and the doctor, who came six miles in his car from
the little town of Roby, looked at them critically, shook his head, and
remarked: "Chicken-pox! There's a good deal of it about just now."

Mrs. Watson was a woman who acted promptly. When she had ushered the
doctor out she tucked up the invalid warmly, put on her hat and coat,
and went to the village, where there was a public telephone call office.
Here she rang up 138 Harlingden, and held a brief but satisfactory
conversation with her second cousin, Mrs. Lascelles. Then she went home,
wrote a letter to Avelyn, and posted it, after which she focused her
attention on the invalid, who was feverish and fractious. The news which
Avelyn received in the letter came as a bolt from the blue.

"I'm so sorry, darling," wrote her mother, "but the doctor says Tony has
chicken-pox, and you mustn't come home to-morrow. I have telephoned to
Cousin Lilia, and she offers to take you in for the holidays, so will
you tell Miss Thompson that you are to go there. No time for more, as I
want to catch the early post. Good-bye, darling! Much love from Mother."

Avelyn had taken the letter to the Cowslip Room to read. She put it in
her pocket, sat down on her bed, and tried to face the situation. Not to
go home for the holidays! The idea was unbearable. Great tears welled
into her eyes, and for a few minutes she was an absolute baby. Red-hot
rebellion raged within her. She was tempted to go home in spite of her
mother's prohibition, and beg to sleep in the cottage, or at Mrs.
Garside's farm, and risk the chance of infection. She would cheerfully
catch chicken-pox if only she might have it at Walden. A wild idea
struck her of asking Pamela to take her in, but the remembrance of Mr.
Hockheimer intervened. She was sure Pamela would not dare to invite a
visitor to Moss Cottage.

"And we were going to have such fun together!" she moaned. "I'll hate to
spend the holidays in town and at the Lascelles's. Oh, it'll be grizzly!
I wish I could stay at school instead. I _will_ go home!"

Better reflections, however, prevailed. Mrs. Watson had brought up her
children to respect her authority, and Avelyn knew that she would not be
able to meet her mother's eyes if she turned up at Walden in distinct
defiance of instructions. There was nothing for it but to submit, though
it was a miserable business. She took her letter to Miss Thompson, and
told her of the altered arrangement. The Principal looked worried.

"I hope you haven't taken the infection yourself," she remarked. "You
might spread it over the school. Are you sure you have no spots?"

"Not a single one," Avelyn assured her.

"Well, don't mention anything about it to the other girls; it would only
make their mothers nervous. Your box shall be left in Harlingden this
afternoon, when the second batch of luggage goes. I suppose you can walk
to your cousin's house. They'll be expecting you?"

"Oh, yes! Mother would tell them what time I am coming."

Avelyn went back to the Cowslip Room and began to put her various
possessions into her box. The packing was a stale business, without any
heart in it. It is horrible to be obliged to pay a visit when you don't
want to go. In spite of Miss Thompson's injunctions, she could not help
confiding her ill news to her room-mates. It was impossible to keep her
woes bottled up in her own breast. She wanted sympathy badly.

"Hard luck!" said Laura.

"Beastly not to be going home!" agreed Janet.

"Poor old sport! I'll send you some picture post cards," consoled
Ethelberga.

"Suppose you break out in spots at your cousin's?" suggested Irma.

This was a new view of the case that had not before occurred to Avelyn.

"I'd _welcome_ them!" she declared. "I'd get Cousin Lilia to put me in
an ambulance and pack me off home."

"Suppose they wouldn't? They might say it was too far, and send you to
the fever hospital instead."

"I wouldn't stay. I'd run away and manage to get home somehow. By the
by, don't tell anybody else about this. Miss Thompson told me to keep it
dark."

"Right you are! We won't blab."

All five girls were busy packing. Their beds were strewn with blouses,
stockings, and other impedimenta. In the midst of the proceedings
entered Miss Hopkins, rather flustered and overdone with the
responsibility of seeing that thirty-six boarders took their essential
possessions home with them.

"Dear me, you're very slow in this dormitory!" she observed. "The Violet
Room have finished and gone downstairs. If there were less talking you'd
get on a good deal quicker. Here are your reports," dealing out from a
packet in her hand five envelopes, addressed respectively to Mrs.
Watson, E. A. Ridley, Esq., Mrs. Talbot, Colonel Duncan, and the Rev. F.
Carnforth. "Now, make haste! I shall expect to find your boxes strapped
when I come up again."

Miss Hopkins departed to do her duty in other dormitories, leaving a
sensation as of east wind behind her. Avelyn stood staring at the
envelope. She was anxious to see her report for this term. The Watson
family were lax as regarded letters; at home they usually passed round
their correspondence as common property. She tore open the envelope,
therefore, and read the report. It was quite a good one, and ended: "Has
done conscientious work, and shows marked improvement."

Avelyn purred with satisfaction.

"Tommiekins is a dear! Mother will be ever so pleased. Even Hopscotch
has given me 'satisfactory', which is more than I expected from her, and
Mr. Harrison has put 'painstaking' for music, though I know he thinks
I'm rather a duffer at it."

"I wonder what they've said about me?" speculated Laura, fumbling in
her box for the envelope which she had just packed.

"And me?" echoed Janet.

There is force in example. In another moment Laura, Janet, Irma, and
Ethelberga were all perusing their reports.

"'Good' for botany! Oh, how precious!"

"Wonders will never cease! I've actually got 'fair' for general
knowledge."

"Oh, hold me up! I've passed muster in maths."

"What does Miss Kennedy mean by this: 'sadly lacking in order, and wants
more application'? I'm sure I'm no worse than the rest of you,"
exclaimed Janet indignantly.

"Has she put that?"

"Yes, I call it spiteful of her!"

"Poor old sport!"

"It isn't as if I'd been so very behindhand all the term. Miss Kennedy
knows I haven't. I declare I shall go and ask her what she means by it!"

The offended Janet, in a furious temper, flounced out of the room in
search of her form mistress. She found her in the study addressing
luggage labels.

"Miss Kennedy, I do think it's too bad to give me such a horrid report!"
burst out Janet. "Why am I specially 'lacking in application'? I'm sure
I've worked just as hard as most of the other girls; and if it's a
question of order, Irma's far more untidy than I am, and so is
Ethelberga! I don't call it fair. You've no right to say such things
about me!"

Miss Kennedy looked up in extreme astonishment.

"How do you know what I've said about you?" she queried.

"Why, it's here, in black and white!"

"What paper have you there?"

"My report."

"Do you mean to say that you have opened your report?"

Janet's face fell. She shuffled her feet uneasily, and did not reply.

"It was addressed to your father. Who authorized you to open it, I
should like to know?"

"Well, Avelyn Watson read hers, so we all thought we could read ours,"
urged Janet in exculpation.

"Indeed!" Miss Kennedy's tone was as iced vinegar. "What an extremely
honourable proceeding! Miss Thompson will have to hear of this! It's
something new in the school for girls to open their parents' letters."

Miss Kennedy abandoned the labels she was directing, and went at once in
search of the head mistress, to whom she told her astounding tale. Miss
Thompson took off her convex glasses, wiped them solemnly, and put them
on again.

"I couldn't have believed they would have _dared_!" she said, with a
note of battle in her voice. "Send Avelyn Watson to me. I must deal with
the matter at once."

Miss Thompson might not be very tall, but she was thoroughly capable of
managing her school. Every inch of her bristled with dignity. Avelyn
entered the room a trifle jauntily, but one steady glance from those
convex glasses caused her feathers to fall.

"Avelyn Watson, I understand that half an hour ago Miss Hopkins gave you
a letter addressed to your mother, to take home with you."

"Yes, Miss Thompson, but I'm not going home for the holidays."

"So I'm aware. In the circumstances the letter should have been posted,
but that has nothing to do with it. What I want to know is on what
authority you have presumed to open it?"

Miss Thompson's grey eyes were almost hypnotic in their power. Avelyn's
fell before their keen scrutiny.

"Mother always used to let me see my reports," she faltered.

"That's quite a different matter, to allow you to look at what she had
already seen herself. To open a letter addressed to anyone else, without
permission, is one of the most dishonourable things that anybody can do.
No lady would disgrace herself by such an action. I am amazed beyond
measure to find that any girl in this school could be capable of it. I
thought you knew our standards better. Have you been a whole term here,
Avelyn, and not yet learnt the very elements of honour? Silverside has
always prided itself upon its traditions."

Avelyn stood aghast. It had never struck her that anyone would construe
her thoughtless and impulsive action in such a light. She had no
further excuse to urge.

"Have you the report here? Then go and fetch it," commanded the
Principal.

Avelyn went without a word. When she returned and handed Miss Thompson
the paper, the latter took out her stylo and appended another line:

"Conduct unfortunately not strictly honourable."

She showed the addition to Avelyn.

"I am going to _post_ this to your mother," she remarked pointedly. "You
may tell your room-mates that they are each to bring me her report. I
shall post theirs also. I am very much disappointed in you all."

Avelyn left the room in the depths of dejection. She had been very near
tears all the morning, and now she could restrain herself no longer. It
seemed an absolutely pixie day, with disgrace on the top of bad news.
She gave a husky message to Laura, telling her to pass it on to the
others, and then flew into the bath-room and had a good weep in private.
Crying is a horrid business; it makes one's head ache, and one's eyes
feel bunged up, and one's throat sore, and one's heart like a lump of
lead. If it is true that our emotions cause waves of colour to emanate
from us, poor Avelyn's aura must at that moment have been a particularly
dingy drab.

[Illustration: AN INTERVIEW WITH MISS THOMPSON]

"What will Mother think of my getting 'dishonourable' in my report?" she
sobbed. "And I can't go home and tell her all about it. I'll write to
her and try to explain, but I'm always a silly at writing. She's kept
all our reports ever since we first went to school, and we've none of us
ever had anything nasty like this in them. It'll just spoil the record.
Oh, dear, what an idiot I've been! I wish I hadn't to go to Cousin
Lilia's this afternoon! I know I'll hate Christmas there. Life's a
perfectly sickening business!"




CHAPTER XIV

War Work


After all, Avelyn enjoyed her holidays far more than she had ever
expected. The Lascelles gave her a kind welcome, and tried to make her
feel at home. They were quite a jolly family--all considerably older
than Avelyn. Two sons were in the Flying Corps, and the third was at a
Government office in the town. The daughters, Mary and Gwen, were busy
with various kinds of war work, and had little time to spare. They made
a great effort, however, to amuse their visitor, and took her out in
turns. Avelyn was treated to pantomime, concerts, and cinemas, and was
invited with the Lascelles to many little parties and social evenings.
She would infinitely rather have been constructing a rockery in the dear
Walden garden than sitting in a picture palace looking at the
eccentricities of Charlie Chaplin, but she appreciated the kindness of
the Lascelles, and felt what the French call _reconnaissante_, which has
a far more subtle meaning than "grateful".

"Couldn't you take Avelyn to the Munition Hostel, Mary?" said Mrs.
Lascelles one day, when plans for entertaining the young guest were
running rather low. "I'm sure Bertha Gordon would show you over the
canteen if you asked her."

"If it would amuse Ave?" began Mary doubtfully.

"I'd just love it!" agreed Avelyn, brightening perceptibly.

"Then I'll ring up Bertha. If it's her afternoon off I'm certain she'll
have us. She told me to come the first opportunity I had, and I've
always seemed too busy up till to-day. I've been wanting to go for ever
so long."

A brisk ringing of the telephone bell followed, and Mary came back
presently with the welcome information that her friend Bertha would be
free from three till six o'clock, and would be delighted to see two
visitors and show them all in her power.

"We'll get up there as early as we can," said Mary, "so that we'll have
time for sight-seeing before tea."

Miss Gordon was doing Government war work in Harlingden. She had taken
her certificate for domestic economy at a training college in London,
and now held a post in the canteen department of a huge munition
factory. The place lay a few miles out of the town. Mary and Avelyn
first caught a tram-car, which whisked them along an uninteresting
stretch of shabby road, and put them down at a corner where three ways
met. It was a tolerably long walk from there to the munition works. The
neighbourhood was dingy, with rows of small cottages and second-rate
shops, and tall chimneys or furnaces in the background. The Chayton
Government factory was a colony in itself, with a special railway line
out from Harlingden. The station platform marked its boundary. After
that came rows and rows of munition cottages--little wooden houses, each
containing three rooms and a bath-room, all exactly similar except for
the numbers on the doors. The girls passed these, and went in the
direction of the hostels. At the great gate of the works stood a sentry
on duty, who asked them their names, residence, and whom they were going
to visit, and entered these particulars in a book before he would admit
them.

"It's all right. Miss Gordon told me that she was expecting you," he
volunteered, as he opened the gate for them.

Feeling rather as if they were going into prison, Mary and Avelyn
stepped forward, and found themselves in a big enclosure fenced with
barbed wire. Each hostel was a large, separate bungalow building, and
there were also several recreation halls. Patches of ground planted with
cabbages lay between. It all looked very new and unfinished, something
like the pictures of mushroom cities in America. In front of them loomed
the canteen, an enormous red-brick structure with a corrugated-iron
roof. Mary enquired at the office for Miss Gordon, and her friend soon
made her appearance.

"I'm so glad you've found your way here! Come in, and I'll show you
everything. It's a queer place, isn't it?"

"I should get lost in it!" declared Mary.

"Oh! it's wonderful how soon you learn to find your way about. What
would you like to see first? The canteen? We shall just have time to go
round before tea, then we'll do the hostel afterwards."

Avelyn trotted off with great interest in the wake of Mary Lascelles and
Miss Gordon. She was going to see a new side of life, and learn what
some women were doing to help the war. Out at the front our boys were
fighting for Britain's honour, but their heroism would be of no avail if
the hands slacked that forged the weapons at home. The workers who made
the munitions, and those who toiled to feed the workers and keep them
fit, were taking their share of the burden, and, in however small and
obscure a way, were pushing the world on towards the victory of Right
over Might.

Miss Gordon first led the way into the canteen, an enormous hall with
seats for three thousand people. There were long tables with benches,
placed in rows, and over these hung sign-boards: "Hostel I", "Hostel
II", "Hostel III", &c.

"Each hostel has its own tables," explained Miss Gordon, "and the girls
are bound to go there. It saves scrambling. They all have food coupons,
and they take them to the counter, and exchange them for any dishes they
want, and then carry their plates to their own places. There's a menu
hung up, and they generally have the choice of several things. It's a
tremendous sight to see them all filing in for their meals."

"Are they easily satisfied?" asked Mary.

"As a rule, but sometimes we get grumblers, and they inflame the others.
You see, there are all sorts and conditions of girls here, and some of
them are a rough lot. Individually they are quite nice, but when they
get together in crowds some spirit of lawlessness seems to permeate
them, and they get utterly out of hand sometimes. Once there was a
terrific row. They were discontented with their rations, and they put
the blame on Mr. Jennings, the canteen manager. Some agitators stirred
up trouble, and one evening things came to a head. There was rice
pudding for supper, and the girls didn't like rice pudding, so they
flung it all about the room and smashed the plates; then they stood on
the seats and shouted and yelled. They said that, if they could catch
the manager, they would teach him a lesson. He dared not show himself.
Indeed, he was obliged to go away altogether. It was about two hours
before the row subsided; all that time the girls were shouting in the
canteen. They had utterly lost control of themselves, and wouldn't
listen to anyone who tried to speak to them. We've a new manager now,
and things are going better."

"How fearfully exciting!" commented Mary.

"Rather too exciting at the time, I can tell you! And the hall was in
such an awful mess, with rice pudding flung about everywhere. Come into
the kitchen now and I'll show you my department."

Avelyn had never seen cooking on so vast a scale before. There were
great polished copper cauldrons for stews, so large that they looked as
if Giant Blunderbore's meals might be prepared in them; there were rows
and rows of ovens and steamers; and an electric meat cutter that sliced
up the joints. Puddings were being mixed in big washing basins, and
vegetables were cut up by a machine. There were enormous cans of milk,
and all kinds of receptacles for other stores.

"We have to calculate exactly what we require, so that there's no
waste," said Miss Gordon. "We send up lists every day, and the lists are
inspected."

The tea canteen kitchen was a department in itself. There were huge
boilers for hot water, rows of bright copper tea urns, and an electric
cutter for bread. Two girls stood at a table buttering enormous piles of
slices.

"What monotonous work!" remarked Avelyn.

"Yes, it is rather," answered Miss Gordon. "They give that to the
novices, and pass them on to something else afterwards. But one gets
accustomed to all the work, and doesn't mind. Now we'll have some tea
ourselves. Come to the Staff Room. I'm allowed to bring in my visitors."

The sitting-room reserved for the members of the staff was divided by
glass doors from the canteen. It had little tables and chairs, and its
wooden walls had been decorated with pictures from magazines, fastened
up with drawing pins. Some of the staff were already seated there having
tea--brisk, capable ladies, most of whom had left comfortable homes in
order to take up war work. Miss Gordon greeted several friends, and
introduced Mary and Avelyn. The scones and the oat cake were delicious,
and were certainly a good advertisement of the cookery done in the
canteen. It was quite a merry little tea-party, for the lady workers
appeared to have a stock of jokes among themselves.

"Now you must see my hostel," said Miss Gordon, pushing aside her cup
and rising when her guests had finished. "If you've seen mine you've
seen them all, for they're exactly alike."

The colony consisted of thirty-two hostels, each holding a hundred
girls. The buildings were separate bungalows, and each had its own
matron, who was responsible for the comfort of its inmates. Miss Gordon
showed Mary and Avelyn into her bedroom, a little room nine feet square,
heated by hot-water pipes, and containing a bed, chest of drawers,
table, wash-stand, chair, and cupboard for dresses.

"They give us the necessary furniture," explained Miss Gordon, "but we
must find our own pretty things. I brought the curtains and the
bed-cover and cushion and dressing-table mats, and of course my own
pictures and photos. There's a good deal of competition in making our
rooms nice."

"This one's perfectly sweet!" exclaimed Avelyn.

"It's not so bad, and there's quite a comfy chair to sit in to rest and
write letters. We can lock up our rooms if we like; the matron has
duplicate keys for cleaning purposes."

There was more to be seen at the hostel: the laundry, where any girls
who liked might wash their own clothes, and where several were busily at
work with an ample supply of water and hot irons; the matron's little
office, with its piles of papers neatly filed; and the store-room, with
its sacks of flour, sugar, rice, and other commodities, that were
weighed out daily and sent to the canteen.

"We lack a cosy sitting-room," said Miss Gordon; "we have to use our
bedrooms instead. There's a recreation hall, where we can dance in the
evenings if we wish, and I hope sometime there's going to be a library.
At present everything's so new, and they have to think of the stern
business part first before they give us luxuries. It's a utilitarian
sort of life."

"Do you like it?" asked Avelyn.

"Yes, on the whole very much. It's interesting, and I always enjoy being
among a crowd. Masses of people attract me, and I've got the community
spirit at present, and want to work with the hive."

Avelyn looked thoughtful. It was not the kind of life that appealed to
her at all. She loved Nature's solitudes, and the companionship of woods
and streams more than crowds of people. To live in a hostel and canteen
would be absolute purgatory. She hoped she was not unpatriotic. Then
her face suddenly cleared.

"I could go on the land when I leave school!" she exclaimed with relief.

Mary Lascelles and Miss Gordon laughed. Avelyn's train of thought had
been so evident. Palpably she was not attracted by what she saw.

"Yes, you'd be doing your bit on the land just as much as in a factory,"
said Miss Gordon kindly. "It isn't everybody who cares to take up
canteen work. Let's hope the war will be over before you leave school.
You'll have several years more at your lessons yet, I suppose."

The little country mouse was certainly turned into a town mouse for
these Christmas holidays. Avelyn felt that she had never before seen so
much of Harlingden, even when she had lived there. The Lascelles were
very public-spirited people, who were interested in everything that was
going on in the city and anxious to lend a hand in all schemes for the
general good. They sewed national costumes for the Serbians, rolled
bandages at the War Supply Depot, distributed dinners at the municipal
kitchens, taught gymnastic classes at girls' clubs, visited crippled
children, got up concerts for wounded soldiers, and organized Christmas
parties for slum babies. They seemed to be occupied nearly every minute
of the day, and they soon swept Avelyn into the whirl of the war
activities. If it was not exactly her ideal life, she nevertheless liked
it, and felt that she was being of use. She went with Cousin Lilia to
the Town Hall, and rather enjoyed standing behind a counter handing out
pies, or ladling soup into jugs for the rows of busy people who kept
pushing in from the long queue standing in the courtyard outside. She
admired the smart quick drill in Mary's gymnasium class, and marvelled
that the girls had so much spirit left after their long day's work; she
made the whole of a Serbian child's dress herself, with beautiful
barbaric red-and-blue trimming on it; she helped to hand cigarettes
round to the soldiers at their concert; and she played "Blind Man's
Buff" and "Drop the Handkerchief" with the slum children at the New
Year's party in the Ragged School.

She had an altogether fresh experience at the Creche. This day nursery
was a new institution in Harlingden, and had been opened in order that
women who wished to help at munitions might leave their babies to be
taken care of while they were at work. Gwen Lascelles gave two mornings
a week to it, as a voluntary nurse, thereby releasing some of the staff
to go off duty. One day she offered to take Avelyn with her, and the
latter jumped at the invitation.

"Matron doesn't mind, and you'd be a help," said Gwen. "Nurse Barnes is
away ill, so we're short-handed just now, and sometimes it's all I can
do to manage. One or two of those toddlers are the limit!"

Elton Lodge had been lent by a patriotic citizen for use as a day
nursery, and was well adapted for the purpose. It had plenty of
accommodation, and a garden where the babies could be out of doors in
summer. Gwen and Avelyn arrived here by ten o'clock, took off coats and
hats, donned aprons, and entered the ward. This was a large, light, airy
room, or rather two rooms thrown together. At one end stood twelve cribs
in which lay twelve babies, most of them fast asleep. At the other end,
grouped round the high fire-guard, were sixteen little toddlers of all
ages from eighteen months to four years. The nurse in charge rose with
an air of relief and handed over her duties to Gwen.

"They're all right," she remarked, "all but Curly, who's in a temper
to-day. Don't let George bully the others, and smack Eddie if he tries
to unfasten the fire-guard. He knows what to expect! Nurse Peters will
be in the laundry if you want her."

The nurse made her escape, and the toddlers came crowding round Gwen,
clamouring for her to open the toy-box. Avelyn strolled across the room
to inspect the babies. They had just had their bottles, and indeed some
had not yet quite finished and were sucking away contentedly. They were
dear babies, some quite wee who counted their ages by weeks, and older
ones with little tight silky curls. One blue-eyed, tearful, barefooted
person stood up in her crib and held out a beseeching pair of arms.
Avelyn could not resist the appeal. She took up the small creature and
cuddled it; it clasped her tightly round the neck, put a confiding head
on her shoulder, and sobbed gently. Gwen disengaged herself from the
toddlers and came across.

"We're really not supposed to take them up and nurse them," she said.
"But I own I break the rules sometimes. Poor little Queenie's a
new-comer; she's been petted at home and hasn't got used to creche ways
yet. She'll soon settle down. Look at Arthur! Isn't he splendid? When he
first came he was simply skin and bone through improper feeding. His
mother used to give him tastes of tea and red herrings. This is Frankie,
our special creche baby. He lives here altogether. His mother is in
prison for ill-treating him, poor wee darling! She's not to have him
again when she comes out--the judge said so. I know you'd love Patty if
she were awake. She's got the cutest little ways."

Gwen went round from cot to cot performing services for the babies,
restoring a teat to a small mouth that had not yet finished its bottle,
covering cold hands, turning the position of some, and patting others
who were inclined to be fretful and wail.

"I just long to nurse them," she assured Avelyn. "But you see it really
wouldn't do to let them get into the habit of thinking that they must be
taken up and played with every time they cry."

"Don't they howl when they first come?"

"Simply yell for a day or two. Sometimes we have to put them in the
isolation ward because they disturb the others so dreadfully. They soon
get accustomed to creche life, though. Their mothers bring them at about
six in the morning, and take them home after work in the evening. When
they arrive here they're washed, and dressed in the creche clothes, and
their own clothes are put on again at night."

"They don't seem shy," remarked Avelyn, who was still hugging Queenie.

"No, that's the best of them. With seeing so many nurses and helpers
they'll go to anybody. They're very sweet when you may have them up and
attend to them. Queenie's getting sleepy. I think you'd better put her
back to bed."

Avelyn disengaged the clinging little arms with reluctance. She would
cheerfully have acted nurse all the morning if allowed. She lowered her
sleepy burden into the crib, and turned her attention to the toddlers,
who certainly needed it. Several of them had followed Gwen, and were
popping mischievous fingers through the bars of the cribs and poking the
babies; some were indulging in a free fight over a toy. Eddie, the black
sheep, was attempting to climb the fire-guard; George was punching the
head of a smaller boy, and Curly, for no particular reason, was standing
with arms outstretched, yelling at the pitch of his lung power. It took
the best energies of the two young helpers to restore order.

"My clothes aren't comfy!" pleaded one small sinner in a tight jersey.
"I'd be good if you'd let me have my own clothes on!"

"George took my horse!"

"I want a doll!"

"Give me a picture-book!"

"I want one too!"

"You won't get anything at all unless you ask prettily!" declared Gwen
sternly. "Where are your manners, I should like to know?"

By the end of the morning Avelyn decided that she could thoroughly
sympathize with the trying experiences of the old woman who lived in a
shoe. She felt in a perfect whirl of babies. They were sweet little
souls, but she would have enjoyed them more individually; to wrestle
with so many at once was decidedly wearing. At twelve o'clock came
dinner. Tiny chairs were placed round low tables, feeders were tied on,
and the children were put in their seats and taught to say grace. The
nurses brought in an enormous rice pudding, and gave platefuls to those
who were old enough to use spoons. Avelyn, sitting in a rocking-chair,
fed alternately one small person on her knee and another by her side.
Gwen was performing a like service.

When the meal was at length over, the toddlers trotted off to low
camp-beds for their midday sleep, leaving a blissful calm in the ward,
where the babies were now receiving their share of attention.

"Do you do this two mornings a week?" asked Avelyn as the girls walked
home.

"Yes, but the children aren't always as troublesome as they were to-day,
and if they get very bad I can call Matron, or a nurse."

"I'd like just the babies alone, if there weren't the toddlers as well
to look after. But to have sixteen of them to keep in order is the
limit. I feel----"

"You'd rather go on the land?" queried Gwen, with an amused smile.

"Yes, if I can choose my war work, I certainly should!"




CHAPTER XV

The School Birthday


When Miss Thompson had bought the connection of The Hawthorns, and
amalgamated that school with her own, she had undertaken a more
difficult task than she had altogether anticipated. She had spoken much
of Silverside traditions, but it had never struck her that the
Hawthorners might have some of their own to which they might cling
tenaciously. It was not easy for the Principal to get to know the exact
mind of the school. She saw the girls in class, respectful,
well-behaved, and very much in awe of her, but it was another matter to
judge the mental barometer of the play-room. She suspected that there
was an undercurrent of trouble: the smallness of the Silverside Hockey
Club, the rival stalls at the bazaar, and the scanty audience at the
dramatic performance had shown her clearly which way the wind was
blowing. She thought the matter over seriously. From her knowledge of
girls she decided that it would be unwise to interfere directly. You
cannot cause rival factions to love each other by act of parliament. She
trusted that time and tact would cement a union, and meanwhile she
meant to hold her judgment in the balance and favour neither party.

On the first day of the next term she made the important announcement
that she had appointed two new prefects, Annie Broadside and Gladys
Wilks, who would be given equal powers with their co-officers. It was a
great step for the day girls to have their former leaders raised to a
recognized position in the school. Though they were only two, as opposed
to four prefects who were boarders, they could look after their own
flock, and redress their grievances. Adah and her companions took the
news badly. They considered that their old privileges were being
outraged.

"What's Miss Thompson _thinking_ of?" asked Consie indignantly.

"She absolutely truckles to those wretched Hawthorners!" declared
Isobel.

"Will Annie and Gladys expect to come to our prefects' meetings?"
demanded Joyce.

"Of course they will! That's the sickening part of it!" said Adah
bitterly. "If Miss Thompson thinks she's going to manage us that way,
she's mistaken. I _won't_ be friends with those Hawthorners! I wish
they'd never come to the school at all!"

"Pretty prefects Annie and Gladys will make!" sneered Joyce.

To do Annie Broadside and Gladys Wilks justice, they made excellent
prefects. They were the acknowledged leaders of their own clique, and
they insisted upon certain rules being obeyed. They even suggested a
few innovations, which, though resisted at first by Adah, were
afterwards acknowledged as so excellent that they were put into force.
It did not add to their favour with the boarders, however, to have the
changes recommended as "what we always did at The Hawthorns".

"What you may have found expedient there need be no law for us here,"
replied Adah with uplifted eyebrows.

January 21st was the school birthday. It was exactly fourteen years
since Miss Thompson had first opened Silverside, and she had kept the
anniversary as a festival ever since. This year it was to be quite a
public occasion. The house was far too small for the increased number of
pupils, and she had decided to build on an annexe, consisting of a large
hall and cloak-rooms. An architect had been busy drawing out plans, but,
owing to the difficulty of getting labour during the war, the contracts
had only just been passed. Now, after many delays, all was in training,
and the builders were ready to begin their work. Miss Thompson felt that
it would be an appropriate act for the foundation stone to be laid on
the school birthday. She was fortunate enough to persuade the Bishop of
the diocese to come and perform the ceremony. It was to be a great day
at Silverside. The girls discussed it freely beforehand, especially the
inmates of the Cowslip Room.

"Ever so many smart people will be there," said Laura delightedly.
"Tommiekins is sending out heaps of invitations. I know, because Miss
Kennedy told Consie, and Consie told Nita Paget. The Bishop will make a
speech."

"And what are _we_ going to do?"

"Stand round and listen, and look intelligent and appreciative, and all
the rest of it, I suppose. We'll have to be saints during the ceremony,
but we'll have some fun afterwards. D'you know the school's to be thrown
open to all sorts of visitors? Not only old fogies who make speeches,
but other people. The day girls may each ask three friends, and they can
bring brothers if they like."

"You don't say so! Miss Thompson _is_ coming on. Are you certain?"

"It's quite true," confirmed Avelyn. "I was allowed an invitation card
too, and I've asked Mother and Daphne and David, and I've got Pamela to
ask Anthony with one of her spare invitations."

"What sport!"

"We'll all have to wear our best dresses," said Janet.

"Rather! You bet we do!"

In preparation for the coming event, a wave of what Miss Hopkins would
have dubbed "worldliness" swept over the Cowslip Room. The girls
reviewed their frocks critically. Laura implored Miss Kennedy to allow
hers to be sent to the dressmaker, to be lengthened two inches. Janet
borrowed the last drops of Ethelberga's before-the-war bottle of
benzoline, to remove a stain left by the dropping, butter-side down, of
a piece of muffin. Avelyn brushed her hair every night with eau de
Cologne to make it glossy. Ethelberga, in defiance of food saving,
begged oatmeal from the cook, and rubbed it on her face to improve her
complexion. Irma, after criticizing the costumes of her friends, sprang
a surprise on them.

"I've sent home for a new dress," she announced carelessly.

"You haven't!"

"Yes, I have, and what's more, I expect it to-morrow. Mother wrote that
she was telling Barclays to post it to me direct."

"Well, I do think you might have told us before."

The other girls felt as if Irma had stolen an advantage. If the idea had
occurred to them they might also have written home for new dresses. It
was unfortunately too late now. Irma alone, of the Cowslip Room, would
attend the festival in the glory of a new gown. She gave herself airs in
consequence. It was an unfortunate characteristic of Irma that she was
apt to get swelled head on occasion. Her room-mates were constantly on
the look-out for symptoms of this complaint, and generally applied
drastic measures before things went too far. In a dormitory it does not
do to allow a girl to maintain too exalted an opinion of herself.

"Irma's swanking no end!" affirmed Ethelberga.

"Putting on side galore!" agreed Janet tartly.

"We ought to do something to take the wind out of her sails a little,"
said Laura, looking pensive.

Avelyn's eyes suddenly sparkled.

"I've got it!" she chuckled. "We'll play a rag on her this afternoon.
It'll be ever such fun! Oh, I've thought of a perfectly gorgeous plan.
No, I don't think I'll tell you what it is yet; but stroll up to the
dormitory as soon after four as you can, and make Irma come too on some
excuse. Then I'll have a little surprise for you."

"You might tell us!"

"No, no! Not a word! It would spoil the surprise."

The members of the Cowslip Room were always ready for some diversion.
They wondered what kind of a practical joke Avelyn was going to play on
Irma. They took particular care to decoy their victim upstairs at four
o'clock. As a bait, Ethelberga offered to lend Irma her manicure set.
They were rubbing pink powder on Irma's almond-shaped nails when a rap
came at the door.

"Entrez!" shouted Janet casually.

It was a demure-eyed junior who made her appearance, carrying a large
parcel.

"This has just come, and it's for your room, so I brought it up," she
announced, dumping it down on the bed, and leaning over to read the
address. "Miss Irma Ridley. Wish it had been Miss Dorothy Elston. I've
no luck. Ta-ta!" and she waved a rather impertinent hand, and trotted
away.

Irma jumped up, upsetting the box of manicure powder, and scattering the
other implements over the floor.

"It's never my box!" she exclaimed.

At that psychological moment Avelyn entered the room.

"I didn't expect it until to-morrow," rejoiced Irma. "They must have
sent it by carrier instead of by post. Lend me your scissors, Janet. Oh,
I'm just dying to look!"

The parcel was a large cardboard box done up in rather untidy brown
paper. It had evidently suffered considerably on the journey. Irma cut
the string with the utmost haste, and began to tear off the wrappers and
open the box.

"I know Mother will have chosen me something pretty," she purred.
"Mother's got such lovely taste, and she wrote that she'd seen the very
thing, and was sure I should like it."

"It's well wrapped up," remarked Janet.

Irma was removing sheet after sheet of tissue paper with a pleased
giggle. At last she reached the core of the package, and unfolded--not a
smart new frock, but her own ordinary school evening dress. Her stare of
blank astonishment was comical.

"What's this? What have they sent me?" she gasped.

But her room-mates were collapsing in various attitudes of mirth, and
she understood. For a moment two red spots flared in her cheeks, then
she had the sense to take the joke with a good grace. If she was angry,
the others shouldn't have the triumph of seeing her annoyance.

"You geese!" she remarked. "I might have known the box couldn't arrive
to-day. So this is why you hauled me upstairs, is it? Oh, go on and
laugh if you like! It doesn't hurt me. I don't mind."

She hung the dress up again in her wardrobe, and folding the sheets of
tissue paper, appropriated them.

"I've been wanting some tissue paper," she said airily.

The girls restrained themselves and sobered down.

"You're a trump, Irma!" declared Avelyn.

"It was too bad, but we couldn't help laughing," murmured Janet.

"Poor old Irmie, you took it sporting!" sympathized Ethelberga.

"You'll like your dress all the more when it really comes," comforted
Laura.

When Irma's parcel arrived the next day her room-mates, having played
their joke upon her, had the grace to be nice and to admire the new
frock, which was a charming creation in blue, and suited its owner
admirably. They went out of their way to be pleasant about it, and
Avelyn lent a hair ribbon which exactly matched the shade of colour,
while Laura offered a chain of Venetian beads. They all felt, as they
dressed for the festival, that if Irma's costume eclipsed the rest of
them, she deserved her little triumph for keeping her temper.

"It's a shame to have to put a coat over it," said Ethelberga.

"Well, she certainly can't stand outside in the cold with only that thin
dress on," decreed Laura.

The ceremony was to take place at three o'clock, and shortly before
that hour all the school, in hats and coats, were marshalled outside to
the spot where the new hall was to be erected. It was a cold, grey
January afternoon, with one or two snowflakes floating down, and
everybody stood and shivered. Some of the invited guests were keeping
warm in the house, and others strolled out to the scene of action. The
girls, drawn up in line, nodded and smiled to many friends from the
town. They were cold, and impatient for the proceedings to begin.
Waiting is weary work on a January afternoon. Their talk, which at first
had been low and subdued, began to buzz, and rose higher and higher.

"What a disgraceful noise!" said Adah. "It's all those wretched
Hawthorners. If Miss Thompson brings out the Bishop while all this
clamour is going on she'll be thoroughly ashamed of the school. Less
noise, girls! Do you hear?"

The girls heard perfectly well, but they did not heed, and the hum of
unrestrained conversation continued. Adah waxed desperate.

"This can't go on! It mustn't!" she said indignantly.

She thought for a moment, then took an extreme measure. She walked up to
Annie Broadside, and confronted her with flashing eyes.

"You're a prefect! If you've any influence with your old crew, why don't
you stop this din? It's a disgrace to Silverside! I've said what I can!"

Annie looked astonished, but for once she fell in with the head girl's
suggestion. Passing along the lines, she commanded silence, and she was
obeyed. Where Adah had failed to restore order, she succeeded. At that
moment the house door opened, and Miss Thompson appeared, ushering out
the Bishop--a reverend figure in gaiters--and followed by the mistresses
and a number of guests. A dead hush fell upon the school, and all eyes
were fixed at attention.

The little ceremony was not very long--perhaps the Bishop himself felt
the cold. There were one or two brief speeches, and Edna Esdale, the
youngest member of Form I, handed a trowel decorated with ribbons, a dab
of mortar was deposited, and the foundation stone laid. The girls sang
"God Save the King", then, as the snow was beginning to come down in
good earnest, everybody thankfully turned into the house. It was
certainly a crowd, but it was pleasant to meet friends. The Watson
family had all turned up, and had actually brought Mrs. Reynolds with
them, to Pamela's great triumph, for as a rule her mother shunned all
public gatherings. The poor lady, though very nervous, seemed to be
mildly enjoying herself.

"I am glad Pam didn't ask her uncle," thought Avelyn. "I shouldn't have
been surprised if he had insisted on coming!"

There was actually a birthday cake for the school, with fourteen little
candles on it, and the Bishop, at Miss Thompson's request, cut the first
slice. There was only enough for visitors, but the girls had had the
satisfaction of viewing it lighted beforehand, and had known that it
was not big enough to go round, so consequently were not disappointed.
Irma, in her new blue dress, produced quite a sensation among those of
her form who had not yet seen its beauties. Its attractions even went
further.

Miss Thompson, ciceroning the Bishop round the premises and expatiating
on the value of her new scheme of ventilation, let her eyes pass over a
line of girls, flattening themselves dutifully against the wall, and
singled out the creation in blue.

"We've many nice children here. Come here, Irma dear! This one is Irma
Ridley. Run, child, and fetch me your Nature notebook. I should like the
Bishop to look at it. We make a point of Nature study, my Lord."

Irma departed on her errand like a blue sunbeam. She stood smiling and
speechless while the great Church dignitary benevolently examined her
record of the months, and murmured his approval.

"Miss Thompson says it all went off splendidly," declared Janet, as the
girls warmed themselves at the class-room fire afterwards.

"David and Anthony called it 'ripping!'" affirmed Avelyn.

"And _I_ was introduced to the Lord Bishop of Howchester!" triumphed
Irma, with the glamour of the honour still dancing in her shining eyes.




CHAPTER XVI

Under the Pines


When spring came, bringing daffodils in the orchard, and primrose stars
under the alder bushes in the meadow, and tiny green shoots on the
hedges, and singing of larks and cawing of jackdaws and twitter of
linnets, and all the other dear delights of the "return of Proserpine",
Walden also celebrated a birthday. It was a year since the Watsons had
obtained possession of their little property. To them all it had been a
glad, golden, glorious year, full of fresh interests, new awakenings,
and hitherto undreamed-of experiences. They had been living spiritually
on a far higher plane; almost unconsciously the influence of hills and
wide skies and dashing waters had passed into their lives and widened
them. So much of what we are in our after years depends on the standard
of happiness we form when we are quite young. If we learn to take
Nature's hand and read in her book, she can teach us wonderful secrets,
and lift our souls so that we can never again be really narrow, or
vulgar, or petty, or commonplace. It is not the mere fact of living in
the country that gives this inner vision. Too often country dwellers go
about with closed eyes and sealed hearts to the meaning of the beauty
around them; but to those who will listen to Mother Nature's many
voices, there comes a wonderful refinement and purity of taste, quite
irrespective of wealth or class distinctions, the mark of the spirit
that is daily growing, overmastering the claims of the physical body,
and fitting itself for something that as yet we only grasp at but cannot
reach. God must love His children very dearly to send them such
beautiful things as the April sunshine, and the light on the hills, and
the white spray of the whirling waterfall, and the violets in the hazel
coppice. They may spoil His earth for themselves, but the springtime
comes again, and the little heartsease flowers will bloom, not only over
those graves in France, but over deeper graves of fallen hopes and lost
ideals.

Mrs. Watson reviewed the year at Walden as so much gain. To begin with,
her primary object in the removal had been an entire success: Daphne,
formerly pale, thin, and an object for anxiety, was now as radiant as a
pink-tipped daisy, and pronounced by the specialist to be absolutely fit
and sound. She spent most of her time out of doors, gardening and
looking after her colony of fowls, and, though she might not be doing
definite war work, felt that she was helping her country by the
production of food-stuffs. Daphne had suddenly grown very pretty.
Avelyn, who often looked at her critically, decided that point
emphatically. It was a delicate, ethereal, elusive kind of beauty, due
as much to expression as to straight features and smiling grey eyes.
Daphne never came out well in a photograph--that was quite a recognized
fact in the family; to appreciate her, you had to see her when she was
excited, or gardening, with her hair rumpled.

The Walden birthday fell early in April, and the Watsons decided to
celebrate it by having a Saturday picnic. Captain Harper promised to
join them--he came up sometimes from the camp to Lyngates--and they also
asked Pamela and her mother. Rather to their surprise, Mrs. Reynolds
accepted the invitation. The poor lady was still somewhat crushed and
depressed, but she seemed to be trying to bestir herself, and, for her
daughter's sake, to make faint, almost pathetic efforts at friendship.
She was shy and uncommunicative, but she evidently liked Mrs. Watson,
and would cheer up a little in her presence, and venture a few remarks,
and even a watery smile. The picnic was to be in the pine woods, so all
met at the cross-roads by the pond as a common starting-point, and set
forth together, armed with tea baskets.

It was a two-mile walk up hill, along a road that twisted at sharp
angles and gave lovely views of the landscape below. Presently they
reached the beginnings of the wood, and some pines rose like giant
sentinels guarding an enchanted land. As they tramped on, the trees
stood thicker, tall and straight as the masts of a ship, with a carpet
of soft fallen needles underneath. All at once a gleam of water flashed,
and they had reached the bourne of their journey, a little grey lake
set in the midst of the wood, with heather and whinberry growing round
its banks. There was a space of shingle down by the water, and here,
after a grand hunt to collect sticks, they lighted a fire and boiled the
kettle they had brought with them.

It was fun sitting round in a gipsy circle, even if the tea was rather
weak and smoky, and the war cake was conspicuous by its lack of sugar
and currants. Everybody could have eaten a great deal more than the
ration, and the provisions disappeared down to the very last crumb.
Afterwards the young folks started to explore the banks, and had a wild
time scrambling over fallen tree trunks, jumping small streams, and
pushing through thickets. At a particularly large fallen pine Avelyn
struck, and demanded a rest. She and Pamela perched themselves on the
top, and announced their intention of sitting still for at least ten
minutes. The boys, who had been cutting walking-sticks from the hazels
by the lake edge, consented to a halt, and settled down with their
penknives, whittling away busily. Mrs. Watson and Mrs. Reynolds were
washing up the tea-cups at the picnic place, and the sound of their
voices echoed faintly over the water. Daphne and Captain Harper seemed
temporarily lost.

"It's like home to be right amongst the pines!" said Pamela, looking
with far-away eyes at the vista of red-brown trunks and green needles.

"Did you live among them in America?" asked Avelyn.

"Yes, our ranch was out in British Columbia, close to the edge of the
forest. At one time Daddy had lumbering business there, and we spent the
summer at a log shanty right up on the mountain. It was glorious, and I
loved it, but it was very lonely. Daddy used to be out all day, looking
after the timber, and Mother and I would be left by ourselves until
evening. Sometimes we didn't see anyone except our own family for weeks
and weeks."

"Were you frightened?"

"Only once, and then we really had an adventure. I was more scared when
it was over than at the time."

"Do tell us about it!" pleaded Avelyn.

Pamela hesitated, and threw pine cones into the lake. She had never been
very expansive about her life in Canada, and the Watsons had heard few
of her experiences there. They had a general impression that Mr.
Reynolds had not prospered in the New World, and that Pamela shrank from
letting her friends know the roughness of her early upbringing. As a
rule they refrained from questioning her--she was not a girl whom it was
easy to question--but an adventure could not be resisted.

"Do tell us, Pam!" urged the boys, wriggling nearer, and stopping their
whittling.

Pamela threw away all the pine cones that lay in her lap, seemed to
think a moment or two, then finally decided.

"All right, I'll tell you if you like! Well, as I've just said, we were
living in a log-house in a little clearing in the forest. We used to
hear the coyotes howling about at night, but we didn't mind those in the
least. They're cowardly beasts, and we'd never seen anything else to
frighten us. One day Father had a much longer round to go than usual,
and he said he should not be back at night, but would sleep with some
friends at a ranch a good many miles off. Mother and I did not mind
being left. Daddy had been obliged to stop away like that before, so we
were accustomed to it. I went out in the afternoon, across the clearing,
and through part of the forest to some open pastures where the berries
grew. I stayed there, picking some and eating them, and putting some in
my basket, for just ages. It was nice there: I found flowers as well as
berries; and I'd brought out a book with me, so I sat down and read and
enjoyed myself. Suddenly I noticed that the sun was beginning to set,
and I jumped up and felt guilty. I knew that Mother would have supper
ready, and that she'd be waiting for me. I ran home all the way. It was
getting quite dusk in the forest as I went through. When I came near the
house, I could see that the shutters were up, covering the window. That
didn't surprise me, because Mother generally closed them as soon as she
lighted the lamp. But she always left the door standing open for me, and
to-night the door was shut too. I was rushing forward to open it, when I
heard Mother's voice calling me.

"'Pamela, stop! Don't come a step nearer, child!'

"I looked round to see where Mother was, and she was in the funniest
place. Our log-cabin had a loft above it, which was reached by a ladder
from the living-room. This loft had a tiny window in the roof, and, lo
and behold, there was Mother peeping out of the window and waving me
back! I thought it so funny that I began to laugh, but Mother wasn't
laughing at all. She called out again:

"'Keep back!'

"Her voice sounded so queer that it suddenly scared me. My legs began to
shake in the silliest way.

"'What's the matter?' I shouted.

"Mother's voice quavered a little:

"'Don't be too frightened, darling! There's a puma shut up in the
house!'

"I was fearfully frightened, all the same. I should have run away if
Mother had not been at the window. I stared at the house, picturing that
horrible thing moving about inside. Mother went on explaining:

"'I'd lighted the lamp and closed the shutters, and I'd left the door
open for you. Then, suddenly, I saw the creature creep into the room. My
first idea was that it would rush out and catch you just as you were
coming home, so I slammed the door, and dashed up the ladder into the
loft, and then kicked the ladder away. He's downstairs quite safe, and
I'm up here and he can't get at me. I've put down the trap-door.'

"'Can't you crawl through the window, Mummie?' I gasped.

"'No, it's too small. I've tried. I'm caged up here, just as much as the
puma is caged down below, and I can hear him raging about. If he upsets
the lamp, the whole place will be on fire.'

"I gave a great cry at that, because it seemed almost a certain thing
that the puma would upset the lamp, and then I knew the log-cabin would
be in a blaze. What could I do? Daddy would not be returning home that
night, and our nearest neighbours were miles away. Yet I must get help,
and at once. There was nothing else for it; every minute was of
consequence.

"'I'll go to the Petersons' ranch, Mummie!' I shouted, and I started off
running without waiting for her to reply.

"I was only eleven, and the forest was getting dark. I had never been
out alone in it at that time of evening. I wasn't brave at all. My legs
shook under me as I ran, and I imagined a puma behind every bush. Then I
was rather uncertain about the trail. In that dim light it would be very
easy to lose my way and never reach the ranch at all. I decided to keep
near the stream, which would guide me. I went stumbling on for what
seemed a long time, and everything was getting darker, when suddenly, on
the other side of the stream, I saw the light of a camp fire. I knew
some lumbermen must be spending the night in the woods there, and that
they might help me. I hallooed and cooeed as loudly as I could, but the
wind was in the wrong direction and carried my voice away, and the
stream was noisy, so I couldn't make them hear me.

"I didn't know what to do. Then, a little farther down, I saw that a
tree had fallen across the stream. I ran along and looked at it. It was
a horrible bridge--I'm a coward at crossing water--but I had to crawl
over it somehow. For a year afterwards I used to dream that I was doing
it again, and would wake up gasping. I've hated running water ever
since. Well, I managed to get across, though I never quite knew how I
did it, and then I ran up to the camp fire, shaking so that I could
hardly tell what I wanted.

"Three men were sitting there, cooking their supper, and one of them
called out: 'Hallo! What's up with you, young 'un?'

"When I said there was a puma inside our house they all whistled. Then
the one who had spoken reached for his gun, and said: 'We'll come with
you, lassie!'

"The others didn't say anything, but they got up and found their guns
too. One of them took me on his back and carried me across the bridge
when he saw how I funked it. He went over without minding it in the
least. I don't know how he could!

"It was fearfully dark going home through the wood, and I could only
just manage to find the trail. We got to our shanty at last, and I
shouted, and Mother looked out of the window and said: 'Thank God you're
back safe!'

"The three men talked over the best way of killing the puma. One of them
prised open the shutters and the other two stood ready with their guns.
The creature had been quiet (so Mother told us afterwards) for a long
while, but when the shutters fell back it went wild, and came tearing
across the room to the window, knocking over the table and upsetting the
lamp. It was shot directly, and fell dead inside the room. But the lamp
had broken and set up a blaze. The men rushed to our shed for spades and
threw earth on the burning paraffin, managing to put the fire out before
any real damage had been done. Then they fixed the ladder again, and
Mother came down from the loft.

"When Daddy came home next day she said she daren't be left alone in the
woods again, so he took us to the settlement, and we lived there the
rest of the summer."

"Did you keep the puma's skin?" asked Anthony, who had followed the
story with breathless interest.

"No, I'd have liked to, but the lumbermen had dragged the thing outside,
and the coyotes got hold of it in the night, so there wasn't much skin
left by morning."

"I think you were immensely plucky!" exclaimed Avelyn warmly.

"Plucky! What else could I have done? I tell you, I felt the biggest
coward out!"




CHAPTER XVII

The Lavender Lady


It was Easter time when the Lavender Lady first rose upon the horizon of
Lyngates. She came with the dog violets and the ground ivy and the
meadow orchises, and several other lovely purple things, at least that
was how her advent was always associated in Avelyn's mind. She took the
furnished bungalow near the church, lately vacated by the curate, and it
was rumoured in the village that she composed music and had published
poetry, and that she had come down into the country for a rest.

When Avelyn first saw her she was sitting in the flowery little garden
raised above the road. She wore a soft lavender dress and an old lace
fichu, and she had dark eyes and eyebrows, and cheeks as pink as the
China roses, and fluffy grey-white hair that gleamed like a dove's wing
as the sun shone on it. She looked such a picture as she sat there, all
unconscious of spectators, against a background of golden wallflowers
and violet aubrietias, that Avelyn was obliged just to stand still and
gaze. In that thirty seconds she fell in love with the Lavender Lady.
It was not a mere mild liking, but a sudden, romantic, absolute,
headlong falling in love. It had come all in a minute and overwhelmed
her. She crept away softly to dream dreams about the vision she had seen
in the garden. At home there were some beautiful illustrated editions of
William Morris's _Earthly Paradise_ and of Dante Gabriel Rossetti's
poems. She took them out and pored over them. The gorgeous
pre-Raphaelite pictures had always appealed to her innate artistic
sense, and set her nerves athrill with a something she could not
analyse. There was not one of them so beautiful as her Lavender Lady
among the flowers.

"She's a little like 'The Blessed Damozel', who leaned out 'from the
gold bar of heaven'," mused Avelyn. "And then again she's like
Gainsborough's picture of 'The Duchess of Devonshire'. I wonder what her
name is, and if I shall ever know her? I don't believe I'd dare to speak
to her. I'd be too shy."

For a whole week Avelyn, terribly in love, lived in a mystic world in
which the Lavender Lady, robed in the glory of the purple night and
stars, was as the central sun, and she herself revolved like a planet
round her orbit. The family could not understand why she insisted upon
choosing heliotrope for her new dress.

"It won't suit you, dear," demurred Mrs. Watson, bewildered by the
firmness of her daughter's sudden attitude.

They were sitting round the table, with three boxes of patterns from
west-end London firms spread out temptingly before them.

"You of all people in helio, Ave!" objected Daphne. "It's the one colour
you ought never to wear--you're far too much of a brunette for any
violet shades. You'd look nice in this biscuit, or this saxe blue. I
always liked you in that blue dress you had a couple of years ago."

"There's a perfectly charming stripe here," recommended Mrs. Watson.

"I want the helio, please," said Avelyn doggedly.

"But _why_ should you want helio when you know it doesn't suit you?"
stormed Daphne. "It's really only pig-headedness, because you've
happened to say so. You can't see yourself in your own dress. If you
could you'd choose another colour."

"You know nothing about it," retorted Avelyn; and matters nearly grew
warm between the two girls.

"There's no need to send the patterns back to-day," interrupted Mrs.
Watson, sweeping the whole consignment back into their boxes. "We'll
bring them out to-morrow and talk about them."

As a matter of fact she sent for the biscuit shade without consulting
Avelyn again, much to the disgust of that damsel, who consoled herself
by taking energetically to gardening, and replanting the round border in
the middle with wallflowers and purple aubrietias. It was the Easter
holidays, so she had time to dream. She made up at least six romances
about the Lavender Lady's past; some of them ended happily and some
unhappily. She could not decide which was really the more artistic. She
walked past the cottage every evening. Once she threw a bunch of violets
over the wall just to the place where the lady had been sitting. Then
she ran away frightened at her own daring. Another evening as she passed
she heard the strains of a piano and the sound of a rich, sweet
contralto voice. She stood and listened spellbound. It was a song she
had never heard before--a lovely, crooning song, like a cradle lullaby.
She would have liked to stay and listen to more, but the Vicar's wife
and daughters were coming down the road, and she fled. Somehow she did
not want to be talked to just at that moment.

On Sunday she chivied the family off to church at least ten minutes too
soon, and they sat in their pew in stately dignity while the rest of the
congregation trickled in. Avelyn, from a post of vantage near the
pillar, eyed everyone that entered with increasing disappointment. Then
her heart gave a great thump. Her Lady was coming up the aisle--not in
lavender this time, but in black and white, with a bunch of violets and
a big picture-hat trimmed with silver ribbon, and a white ostrich boa
and dainty white kid gloves. The verger was showing her to a seat in
front, actually the next pew but one, and Avelyn felt thrills running
down her spine. She was so glad the verger had selected a pew in front.
If it had been behind, she would have been absolutely obliged to
disgrace herself by turning round. After the service she managed to drop
her book, and to fumble for it long enough to delay her family for a
few moments and prevent them from leaving before the Lavender Lady. They
passed her in the churchyard. She was actually speaking to the Vicar's
eldest daughter. Avelyn decided that Barbara Holt had more than her
share of luck. At dinner-time, over the joint of roast beef, Mrs. Watson
remarked:

"That seems a sweet lady staying at the bungalow. Miss Carrington, I
hear, her name is. She comes from London, and Mrs. Holt says she's very
musical. I think I shall have to call."

Avelyn went on eating beef and potatoes with a jumping heart but outward
composure. It had not struck her that it was possible to pay social
calls on Dante Gabriel Rossetti heroines. What if she were to meet the
Lavender Lady at close quarters? Even speak to her? The idea seemed to
need preparation.

Mrs. Watson had quite made up her mind.

"Daphne and I will go on Tuesday," she said.

It was of course appropriate that Daphne, being the eldest, should go,
but Avelyn envied her all the same.

When the momentous afternoon arrived she enquired anxiously what her
sister was going to wear. It seemed vitally important that the family
should make a good impression.

"You'll put on your grey coat and skirt, won't you?" she said
beseechingly.

"I don't think I will. I really don't want to go at all," yawned
Daphne.

Not want to go! Avelyn could hardly believe it. She stared at Daphne
incredulously.

"Don't you feel well?" she asked.

"Oh yes! it isn't that, but I hate paying calls, and I promised the boys
to walk to Fulverton. Captain Harper said he'd meet us and show us a
squirrel's nest he's found. Suppose you go and call with Mother instead
of me?"

Avelyn gasped. Such unselfishness took away her breath.

"Do you really mean you'll let me go instead of you?"

"With all the pleasure in life, child, if you want to." Daphne's manner
was airy and elder-sisterly. "Of course it's nothing to me whether we
meet Captain Harper or not, only he made rather a point about it, and
perhaps it would seem--well, rude, if I let the boys go without me. He's
been very kind to David and Tony, and one doesn't like to hurt his
feelings."

Two things swept across Avelyn's bewildered consciousness: first, that
Daphne was growing up--growing up most suddenly and unmistakably; and
secondly, that she had resigned her privilege, as elder daughter, to
call on the Lavender Lady. The first would have to be considered at
leisure, in all its bearings and side issues; the second was for the
moment uppermost.

"Go and ask Mother what you're to put on," said Daphne, as if the whole
question of the exchange were settled.

It was an outwardly calm and self-possessed, but inwardly much-agitated
Avelyn who entered, in her mother's wake, into the little drawing-room
at the bungalow. One comprehensive glance took in the fact that the room
was utterly different from what it had been during the curate's
occupation. There were books and flowers, and other pretty things about.
The general tone had changed from commonplace to artistic. On the
window-sill lay a half-finished sketch of the village. There was music
on the open piano. But these details faded into secondary consideration,
for the Lavender Lady was entering, in the soft heliotrope gown, with a
sprig of wallflower pinned into the lace fichu.

Occasionally in our lives we meet with people whose whole electric
atmosphere seems to merge and blend with our own. We feel we are not so
much making a new acquaintance as picking up the lost threads of some
former soul-friendship. Avelyn experienced thrills as she shook hands.
She was far too shy to say much, but she sat and listened rapturously
while her mother and Miss Carrington did the talking. For the present it
was enough to be in the vicinity of her goddess. The maid brought in
tea. There were a dainty, open-hem-stitched Teneriffe cloth, Queen Anne
silver teapot and Apostle teaspoons, and scones and honey. A bowl of
primroses and forget-me-nots was on the table.

The half-hour's visit passed like a dream.

"You'll come and see me again, dear, won't you?" said Miss Carrington,
as she held Avelyn's hand in good-bye.

The hot colour flooded the girl's face. Her eyes shone like stars.

"Oh, may I?" she cried impulsively.

That afternoon marked an epoch. Friendship is a matter more of
temperament than of years. That the Lavender Lady was middle-aged, and
Avelyn barely sixteen, made not the slightest difference to either of
them. Each character dove-tailed comfortably into the other. Miss
Carrington had a great sympathy for girls, and she seemed to understand
Avelyn at once. As for the latter, she had utterly lost her heart. But
for the fear of making herself a nuisance she would have nearly lived at
the bungalow. She went there very often by special invitation, and spent
glorious, delightful afternoons sitting in the garden, talking about art
and books and music, and the foreign places Miss Carrington had visited.
It fascinated Avelyn to hear about Venice and Rome and Sicily and Egypt,
and made her long to go and see them for herself.

"You shall, some day, when the war's over," said the Lavender Lady
confidently.

Sometimes they would go for walks together, or Avelyn would wait with a
book while Miss Carrington sketched, or--what she loved immensely--would
sit in the twilight while her friend improvised soft dreamy music at the
piano. The little volume of poems, _Cameos_, by Lesbia Carrington, she
already knew almost by heart; the small, white-and-gold edition, with
its signed autograph, was her greatest treasure. To Avelyn it was a
most inspiring friendship, that roused dormant hopes and ideals in her
nature which promised to make rapid growth afterwards. Her Lavender Lady
proved the most delightful of confidantes. It was possible to tell her
everything. She never laughed at Avelyn's secrets, though she was merry
enough on occasion.

One evening she and Avelyn sat in the little garden, watching the red
glow of the setting sun fade away behind the dark boughs of the yew
trees. The air was heavy with the scent of flowers; from the fields came
the caw of rooks, as long flights passed homeward to roost. Avelyn
squatted on the grass, with her head against the Lavender Lady's knee,
and held her hand tight.

"Next week I shall be back at Silverside," she whispered. "I just hate
the thought of it!"

"Poor little woman!"

"It isn't as nice there as it ought to be, somehow. Things seem always
at sixes and sevens, and it's so horrid."

"What's the trouble?"

"The old school and the new school won't mix. The Silversiders look down
on the Hawthorners, and the Hawthorners resent it, of course, and just
detest the Silversiders. It's a constant bickering the whole time. I
think it's almost worse since Annie and Gladys were made prefects. It's
perfectly wretched for me, because I'm between two stools."

"How's that?"

"Well, you see, in a way I'm a boarder, but then I'm the only weekly
boarder, so the others who stay there the whole term rub it into me that
I'm not quite one of themselves. They can't forget that I used once to
go to The Hawthorns, even though it's a long time ago, and they keep
bringing it up against me as if I were a sort of traitor in their midst.
Then it's quite as awkward for me with the day girls. I like some of
them very much; they used to be old chums of mine, and I'd like to go on
being friends with them. But if I even speak to them in school, Laura or
Janet are down on me like anything, and ask me if I've forgotten I'm a
member of the Silverside League."

"What is the League, please?"

"It's a kind of blood-brotherhood among the boarders to keep up
Silverside traditions. When the day girls heard of it, they started an
'Old Hawthorners' League' in opposition."

"But surely you're all Silversiders now?"

"We are in name, but nothing else. We still feel two separate schools.
The day girls wouldn't play hockey with us in the winter. They got up a
club of their own, and wore their old school colours. They won ever so
many matches, and the Silverside Club did so badly. Adah was dreadfully
sick about it. She thought them so mean to desert."

"Perhaps they felt they wouldn't be welcome."

"That's exactly the point. Instead of pulling together, it's always
boarders versus day girls; and as for poor little me, I'm neither fish,
flesh, fowl, nor good red herring!"

The Lavender Lady smiled, and then looked thoughtful. She stroked
Avelyn's hair.

"Poor little woman!" she said again.

"I feel like Mohammed's coffin, slung between earth and heaven."

"Can't something be done to bring these rival factions into harmony?
You're one school now, and ought to work together for the common good."

"That's what Miss Thompson says, but it doesn't make any difference."

"Girls often won't listen to teachers. The movement must come from
within, not without. It seems to me, Ave, you're the one to set it in
motion."

"I?"

Avelyn turned up her face in the greatest amazement to meet the Lavender
Lady's calm eyes.

"Yes, _you_, darling! Don't you see you have an absolutely unique
opportunity? You're the only girl in the school who is in touch with
both sides. You can get at both the boarders and the day girls. The
hockey season is over, and I suppose next term you'll be starting tennis
and cricket?"

"Yes, so we shall."

"Well, suppose directly you get back to Harlingden you propose a United
League of all Silversiders to win credit for the school. You could set
about it very tactfully, and sound your principal parties first."

"_I?_ But they'd think it such cheek! A Fifth Form girl, and only a
weekly boarder."

[Illustration: AVELYN AND THE LAVENDER LADY]

"And Gideon said, 'Wherewithal shall I save Israel? I am the least in my
father's house'," quoted Miss Carrington. "On the contrary, I think it's
the chance of a lifetime. I believe you're the one girl to do it. It
would be something worth accomplishing, wouldn't it, to unite the
school?"

"Rather!"

"Is there any public occasion when you could bring forward the
suggestion?"

"Yes; there's the School Council on the first Wednesday of term. Anybody
is allowed to put things to the meeting, and votes are taken."

"You couldn't have a better opportunity. Talk in private to the girls
first, and persuade a number of them from both sides to be ready to back
you up. Then state your proposal. By the by, what are the Silverside
colours?"

"Pale-blue and navy."

"And the old Hawthorn colours?"

"Navy and pink."

"If you're wise, you'll amalgamate them, and ask Miss Thompson to let
you have new badges of pale-blue, pink, and navy. I believe it might
just make all the difference to the state of feeling."

"Perhaps you're right. But I still feel afraid--it's a big thing to
attempt, and I don't know whether I can screw up the courage. Suppose I
fail? Suppose they only laugh at me, and tell me to mind my own
business?"

"You won't fail! You mustn't _think_ failure! Make up your mind
beforehand that you're going to succeed, and that what you say will
persuade them. Oh, Ave darling, do try! It would be such a grand thing.
There are those two great streams of girls, each running its own way.
They only need a thin barrier removed to make them into one mighty
river. Some common purpose should unite them. Perhaps in their heart of
hearts they're all secretly longing for union. Who knows? Can't your
hands lead them together? You said once you'd do anything for my sake."

"So I did--and I mean it!"

"Then take up this crusade, and be a Red Cross Knight for the School
Colours!"

"For the School Colours and for you, dear Lavender Lady!" said Avelyn,
kissing the soft hand in token of her vow.




CHAPTER XVIII

The Loyal School League


Avelyn went back to school in a serious frame of mind. She knew that she
had undertaken a big thing, and, though she mentally set her teeth and
meant to grapple with it, she felt that her dear Lavender Lady did
not--could not--realize all the difficulties that lay in her path. Miss
Carrington's supreme faith in her buoyed her up, however; she would try
her utmost, and if failure came---- No! the Lavender Lady had said it
was fatal even to mention failure, and that she must go about her errand
absolutely determined to succeed.

She began by sounding the members of her own dormitory. They received
the suggestion with wonderful favour.

"The school's been slack enough at games all the winter!" commented
Irma.

"Time it bucked up, certainly!" agreed Janet.

"That Hawthorners' Hockey Club was a scandal!" said Laura.

"Well, if we don't take care they'll be turning it into a tennis club
for the summer," warned Avelyn.

"We'd better make some sort of a move," grunted Ethelberga.

"It's Adah that's at the bottom of all the trouble," said Laura, sitting
on the floor with her arms clasped round her knees, and swaying
thoughtfully to and fro. "Adah's a thorough old-fashioned Silversider,
and hates the new contingent--that's the matter in a nutshell."

"Isobel and Consie and even Joyce would come round directly if Adah
would only let them," agreed Irma.

"And Annie and Gladys would meet them half-way," nodded Janet.

"Adah's the most ripping tennis-player I know," ruminated Laura.

"And so's Annie. She won the trophy last year at The Hawthorns."

"The two together would make the best champions any school ever had."

"Well, look here, they've just _got_ to go together!"

"I've an idea--a brain wave!" said Avelyn. "The Council Meeting will be
to-morrow. Well, this afternoon let us propose a tennis set, 'School
versus Mistresses'. Miss Peters and Miss Broadwin are simply A1 at
tennis, and everybody knows they are, so we'll insist upon Adah and
Annie playing together for the school. They can't refuse when it's put
like that. Whether they win or lose, it'll pave the way for what we want
to bring forward to-morrow."

"Right you are, O Queen! It's a blossomy idea!"

Avelyn got up, and straightened her tie.

"I'll go down now to the dressing-room, and catch those day girls as
they come in, and have a talk with some of them."

"And I'll go and sound Miss Peters about the set this afternoon. She's
in a good temper to-day, because she's had a letter from the front."

Miss Peters and Miss Broadwin, fresh and fit after the holidays, were
quite disposed to accept the challenge of the girls and wield rackets on
behalf of the mistresses. Universal public opinion fixed upon Adah and
Annie as champions for the school, and they submitted, a little
bewildered and dismayed, but bowled over by the suddenness of the
suggestion. Every girl at Silverside--except three victims who had music
lessons and one who had toothache--crowded round the tennis court to
watch the exciting contest. Miss Peters and Miss Broadwin were
formidable opponents; they had been members of their college clubs, and
though slightly out of practice had not forgotten their former skill.
The two prefects knew that it would need their utmost ability to fight
them. With the whole school looking on, each nerved herself to do her
best.

In the first game the Mistresses scored. Miss Peters's serves seemed
almost invincible, and as for Miss Broadwin her arms were elastic. Adah
and Annie looked at each other grimly. They had begun to take their
opponents' measure, and also to estimate each other's play. In the next
game they exercised extreme caution, and did not repeat certain
mistakes. After an exciting rally the score this time fell to the
School.

"Now for the tussle!" laughed Miss Peters, as she collected balls.

Adah could not help admiring the way Annie played that last game. She
kept her nerve splendidly, and her back-hand strokes were magnificent.
For an anxious moment or two the luck of the School trembled in the
balance, but by a frantic effort on the part of the prefects the set was
secured. The vanquished Mistresses took their defeat sportingly, and
congratulated the victors.

"One of the best sets we've ever had at Silverside!" declared Miss
Broadwin, pinning up a tail of hair that had strayed down her back in
the heat of the combat.

"If you two go on like this you'll be invincible!" laughed Miss Peters.
"You need to get a little more accustomed to each other's play, and
you'd make splendid champions."

"You were both absolutely topping!" declared the school, crowding round.

Adah took her honours stolidly, but appreciated them none the less.
After all, it was pleasant to be congratulated by the day girls; it made
up in some slight degree for the humiliation of that afternoon when they
had run away rather than witness the dramatic performance.

"We must practise together," she said to Annie; and Annie actually
replied:

"I could stay half an hour every day after school, if you like."

This amnesty between the rivals, heard and reported by several
listeners, surely seemed to pave the way for tomorrow's proposals.
Avelyn's mental barometer stood at "high hopes".

The Council Meeting was always held in the big schoolroom, and, by
old-established rule, classes stopped at 3.30 instead of 4, so as to
allow extra time for the proceedings. No mistresses were present, and
the girls, within certain limits, were allowed to make any arrangements
they thought fit for the ensuing term. The prefects took their places on
the platform, and Adah, as head girl, acted chairman.

The room was very full. On the front benches sat rows of round-eyed
youngsters, bare-legged, in the prevailing fashion for socks, with their
hair tied with broad ribbons. Behind them were excitable pig-tailed
juniors, wriggling restlessly in their seats, and continually letting
their whispers rise to a murmur that called down rebuke from the
platform. These were as sheep ready to follow any leader, and did not
understand the objects of the meeting. They had come simply because they
were told to do so, and because they thought it would be fun. The larger
half of the school, girls from twelve to seventeen, were in a state of
indecision. It had been rumoured that Annie Broadside intended to turn
the Old Hawthorners' Hockey Club into a tennis club for the summer, and
there was in certain quarters a strong feeling that they ought to
support her. They wondered what was going to happen. Avelyn, with Laura,
Janet, Irma, Ethelberga, Pamela, and several other "backers", sat at the
end underneath the clock.

Adah began the proceedings by reading a report of the school activities
for the previous term. She made the very best of what she had to say,
but it was felt to be a poor record. The societies and guilds had been
decidedly languishing, and had achieved next to nothing. It was
impossible to refer to them with any pride. There was perfunctory
clapping, markedly half-hearted.

"Now we've got to decide on what we're going to do this term," continued
Adah. "I suppose we shall have our usual societies--the Tennis Club, and
the Cricket Club, and the Photographic Union. If anybody wants to make
any suggestions, now is the time. This is an open meeting, and everyone
who likes is at liberty to speak--in turn, of course. There may be some
little points you'd like to bring up. Do so by all means. We prefects
are perfectly willing to listen to you, and to discuss them."

Adah spoke in her usual rather patronizing fashion. Her words were
succeeded by a dead hush. Everybody felt that there were not only little
points, but very big points which needed to be raised, yet nobody seemed
able to voice the general discontent. A whisper passed along some of the
forms to the effect that day girls ought to have their rights. Adah
watched the heads bent together and the moving lips.

"Speak to the chair, please!" she reminded them.

But at that they sat up silently.

Many of the audience wondered if Annie would take up the cudgels for the
day girls and fight the question out upon the platform, but Annie made
no sign. Was she thinking of the Old Hawthorners' League, and would she
perhaps again call a rival meeting on the common, as she had done in the
autumn?

"Am I to take it that you consider former arrangements satisfactory?"
asked Adah, frowning at some of the babies, who were playing with a
celluloid ball.

Then Avelyn stood up.

"I should like very much to discuss one or two points, if I may," she
began.

"Certainly! Go on!"

"Well, first of all I think we ought all to be rather ashamed of the
report. For such a big school I certainly think we ought to have far
more to show for ourselves."

Several of the prefects nodded, and began to look interested.

"There are nearly a hundred girls here this term, and we may call
ourselves the principal school in Harlingden. We ought to take quite a
place in the county, and challenge other schools for matches. We haven't
shone very much in games hitherto, have we?"

A discontented murmur replied from the benches. There was an electric
thrill in the air. Avelyn took courage. At first her sentences had come
hesitatingly; now that she warmed to her subject, her words flowed more
easily. She had a sudden feeling that the Lavender Lady was thinking of
her and inspiring her; the idea roused the utmost effort of which she
was capable. She determined to speak boldly, and not beat about the
bush. If she gave offence she could not help it.

"What we want here is a spirit of union. If we all determine to stick
together and back one another up at all costs, we might do great things.
Don't let us have two parties. Let us forget any old squabbles, and be
loyal to the school. I believe we've heaps of talent amongst us if it
only gets a chance to come out. Let's remodel our societies on a new
basis, and give the best places to whoever will gain the most credit for
the school. Why shouldn't we try this year for the County Shield? With
two such champions as Adah Gartley and Annie Broadside we ought to have
a sporting chance. Just think if we could win the shield for Silverside!
Then there's cricket. We can muster up strongly in that respect, too.
Joyce Edwards, and Minnie Selburn, and Gladys Wilks, and Maggie Stuart
would take a good deal of beating! We could get up a first-rate Eleven,
and arrange some topping matches. Think how priceless it would be to go
and watch them, and cheer on our own side!"

Avelyn paused for breath. She had spoken warmly, and the excitement had
quite carried her away. Her cheeks were flushed, and her eyes were
shining. She had held the attention of the room with a kind of
magnetism. All faces had been turned towards her, and her every word had
been closely followed.

The girls now burst into a buzz of general conversation. Each wanted to
discuss the matter with her neighbour. It was plain that the project
was received with approval. Even the prefects were having a few private
remarks among themselves. Joyce and Isobel in particular were nodding
emphatically as if urging the project upon Adah. Annie whispered to
Gladys, and they both spoke to Consie. All were looking expectantly
towards Adah. The head girl rang the bell for silence.

"What you say is very true. Silverside ought to take its proper place in
games, and I think we all agree that a special effort should be made
this summer. As this is a business meeting, will you please put what you
wish to suggest in the form of a proposition?"

"Certainly. I beg to propose that we form a 'Loyal School League', the
object of which shall be to advance in every way the credit of
Silverside. We ought to have a President and several Vice-presidents,
and a Committee, with two representatives from each of the upper forms.
If any very important question arises we should have a Council Meeting
of the whole school, and put the matter to the vote. I also propose
that, for the sake of further cementing our unity, we adopt a new badge,
and have for our colours pale-blue, pink, and navy. It would be an
effective combination, and would mean a good deal to most of us. We
would pledge ourselves to do our utmost for the new Silverside Colours."

As Avelyn again stopped, a roar of applause rose from the room. The
girls were completely carried away by her idea; the blending of the
badges seemed the one thing needed to unite the school. Though a few
prejudiced "Old Silversiders", including Adah, looked rather blank, the
majority, even among the boarders, were plainly in favour of the
suggested change.

"Does anybody second this proposition?" asked the head girl. "We
prefects want to hear the view of the school."

A dozen stood up, anxious to speak. Adah nodded to Laura Talbot. Laura
had been at Silverside five years, and was a dependable character, not
easily carried away by tides of emotion. Her ideas might reasonably be
the gauge of average popular opinion.

"I've been thinking for a long time that we ought to do something," said
Laura. "It seems to me that a 'Loyal School League' just hits the nail.
I believe we'll forge ahead this term and win laurels for our new
colours. I have very great pleasure in seconding this proposition."

"Then I put it to the vote. All in favour kindly hold up their hands."

Every arm in the room shot up instantly. Adah looked at the waving show
of hands before her, and realized that the general feeling of the school
favoured unity. She had the sense to accept the situation in a generous
spirit.

"Carried unanimously!" she declared, and turning round, smiled at Annie,
who smiled back. The girls cheered, ostensibly at the carrying of the
resolution, but partly to see the rival leaders on such affable terms.

"We want a president, and I propose Adah!" shouted Ethelberga.

"And the rest of the prefects as vice-presidents!" amended Janet.

"Hear, hear!" came from the audience.

"And I," said Pamela, jumping up suddenly, "beg to propose that Avelyn,
who suggested the whole idea of the League, shall be elected secretary."

"Rather!"

"Good biz!"

"Ave, by all means!"

"Oh, no, please! I don't want to grab any office for myself!" protested
Avelyn.

"Nonsense! Brace up, child, for you'll have to do it!" urged Laura.
"Why, you've brought about the whole business. Besides, you belong to
both parties, so you'll bind us together as nobody else could."

"The missing link, in fact!" hinnied Irma, trying to be funny.

The meeting passed the remaining resolutions in good order, then broke
up in a whirl of excited talk. A deputation of prefects visited Miss
Thompson's study, and gave her a digest of the afternoon's proceedings.
She listened approvingly.

"I'll order the new badges at once, and see about hiring a larger
cricket field," she commented.

The Principal did not judge it discreet to say more to the girls, but
over cocoa that evening with the mistresses she voiced her
satisfaction.

"I knew they'd come round in time if we let them alone. You can't force
these things. I suppose it was only natural that the old school and the
new should find some difficulty in mingling. Girls are queer creatures,
and often very prejudiced. It won't have done them any harm to see what
a poor record they made in games when they were striving for rival
factions. I consider it an excellent object lesson. I expect they'll all
try their best now, and practise away hard at cricket and tennis."

"I hoped it marked a new era when I saw Adah and Annie win that set at
tennis," nodded Miss Peters.

"They're both excellent girls in their way, and should do great things
for the school, if they'll only pull together," agreed Miss Hopkins.

Avelyn spent her half-hour of leisure that evening in writing to Miss
Carrington.

    "DARLING LAVENDER LADY,

    "I have actually done it! Or rather, _you_ have done it, for it
    was entirely your idea. I can scarcely believe it is true, but
    the League is an accomplished fact, and the new colours, and all
    your dear jinky suggestions. I don't know how I had the cheek to
    stand on my legs and make the proposal before the whole school,
    but I thought of my promise to you, and I did it somehow. I
    hardly remember what I said. The girls are tremendously keen on
    the League; they say it's a topping notion. Can you believe it,
    darling? they've made me secretary. Little me! I shall have to
    write the letters to other schools, challenging them to matches!
    I shall use the lovely new blotter you gave me.

    "Good-bye, and thank you a hundred thousand times for everything
    you are to me!

        "With love from
            "Your devoted
                "AVELYN."




CHAPTER XIX

The Surprise Tree


Having once made up their minds to concentrate their united energies on
establishing a record at games, the girls at Silverside set to work in
dead earnest. They organized definite and systematic practice both at
cricket and tennis, and tried to bring their play to a higher standard.
They found much help in this respect from Miss Peters and Miss Leslie,
who had come as new mistresses in September, and were keen on tennis and
cricket. During the winter there had been no opportunity for them to
display their talents, but now they proved invaluable as coaches. Both
had been in large schools and thoroughly understood what was required.
They encouraged the girls to arrange matches.

"It's worth it even if you're beaten," said Miss Leslie. "You see other
people's play and learn to make a good fight. You can often pick up most
valuable hints from your opponents. Some of the best tips I ever had I
got from a girl who invariably beat me."

It was quite a novel state of affairs at Silverside for day pupils to
stay after four o'clock and join the boarders in tennis court or cricket
field, but after the first week the latter got used to the invasion of
their privileges, and decided that the improvement in the general play
was ample compensation. The new badges soon arrived, and everybody
decided that the combination of pink, pale-blue, and navy was highly
satisfactory. The Loyal School League seemed likely to forge ahead.
Avelyn made a capital secretary; she was prompt and business-like, and,
though she did not push herself forward unduly, she was always ready
with helpful suggestions. At one of the committee meetings she started
the idea of the Romp Day. It was the Lavender Lady who really thought of
it--she inspired all Avelyn's best schemes. They had talked it over and
planned it out in the little garden at Lyngates, where roses were now
blooming instead of the wallflowers and aubrietia.

"I'm glad the League's prospering," she had said. "It's splendid how
you're all working together now and coaching each other. It's a pity,
though, if all this new spirit of helpfulness spends itself entirely on
the school. It ought to find a wider outlet. You're having jolly times
in the playing fields this term. Can't you pass on some of the fun to
others who never get a chance to play games for themselves? I mean the
little cripple children. There's a branch of the 'Poor Brave Things'
Society in Harlingden. If Miss Thompson would let you give them an
afternoon's outing they'd have the time of their lives. Could you
possibly suggest it, do you think? I really believe it's the sort of
thing Silverside would enjoy."

The League and Miss Thompson justified the Lavender Lady's good opinion
of them. They took up the idea with enthusiasm, and decided to organize
a "Romp Day" for the crippled children. They communicated with the
secretary of the "Poor Brave Things" Society, with the result that
invitations were sent out to thirty little invalids to come to a picnic
party in the garden at Silverside and be entertained. A special
half-holiday was given for the occasion, and all the school was asked to
unite in making the affair a success. Miss Thompson wished the day girls
to stay to tea that afternoon, but catering was a difficulty. It was
utterly impossible for her to provide a meal for a hundred and thirty
children. The Food Controller rationed the school according to the
number of its boarders. The Principal was inventive, however, and hit on
an excellent solution of the problem. She asked each day girl to bring
enough tea, sugar, milk, buns, and cake for her own consumption and for
half the allowance for one guest, and in this way provided ample for
everybody, without anyone being asked to give more than a very small
contribution of food.

"Before the war I should have been horrified at the idea of inviting you
to come to a party and bring your own provisions," said Miss Thompson.
"In these days of semi-famine, however, we have to do many new and
strange things. It's wonderful what we can get used to when we try."

The girls themselves thought it was immense fun each to bring a little
basket to make the feast.

"It's like an American tea," said Gladys Wilks. "I'm going to make some
scones myself. We've got a quarter of a pound of sultanas hoarded up.
We've been saving them for some great occasion; Mother said they'd do
for my birthday cake, so I know she'll let me use them for this instead.
I've got a topping recipe, if they only turn out as it says."

"Guess they'll be jolly nice. Bags me one if the cripples don't want
them all!" declared Maggie. "You shall have a piece of my sandwich-cake
instead."

"Look here," interrupted Gertrude; "this business isn't to be all tea
and buns. We've got to give these kiddies a real good time. Suggestions,
please! Don't all speak at once!"

"We're going to sing to them."

"And the Juniors are to do a dance."

"How about some gym display?"

"Um--tolerable! But my idea is that they won't want to sit and watch us
perform the whole time. There ought to be something specially for
themselves. Stop a minute! I've a brain wave! Don't speak to me! My
mind's working."

The girls grinned expectantly, while Gertrude stood with finger uplifted
for silence.

"Got it!" she proclaimed at last. "We'll have a Surprise Tree."

"What's that?"

"Well, you can't exactly have a Christmas tree at this time of year,
but we'll rig up something very like it. You know that little
monkey-puzzler near the summer-house? We'll decorate it with streamers
of paper and ornaments, and hang presents on with coloured ribbons.
There must be one for each crippled child, or two if possible. Every
girl in this school has got to bring a present."

Once the idea of providing suitable entertainment for their invalid
guests was mooted, many suggestions were forthcoming. Vivian Roy, who
was the lucky owner of a Shetland pony and a tiny basket cart, offered
to bring these to school and take relays of children for drives round
the garden. Sybil Beaumont undertook to lend a very superior gramophone;
the mother of one of the Juniors promised to send oranges. Violet Parker
told her aunt, the Mayoress, about the party, and that kind-hearted lady
arranged to allow the use of her carriage for the afternoon, to carry
some of the children from their homes to the school and back. As means
of conveyance were a real difficulty, several other parents followed her
example and sent governess cars or hired cabs. It was a form of help for
which the secretary of the "Poor Brave Things" was particularly
grateful.

"You've no idea what trouble it is for their friends to bring them," she
explained. "Unless they possess, or can borrow, some kind of invalid
carriage it's an impossibility. Also many of them can't spare the time
to do it. In the days of petrol plenty we used to have an annual outing
for the children, and people lent their cars, but of course that is all
stopped now."

On the afternoon in question the numerous hostesses were waiting about
in the garden long before their visitors were due. Each day girl had
duly brought her basket, the contents of which were to be pooled for
general consumption. The gramophone had been placed on a table outside,
and the Shetland pony and cart were in readiness near the door.

"I expect there's been a terrific amount of washing and dressing and
hair-curling going on," laughed Annie. "I hope the children will survive
your scones, Gladys!"

"Don't be insulting! My scones are delicious! I've tasted them, so I
know."

"You greedy thing!"

"Certainly not. I couldn't bring them without seeing whether they were
fit to eat."

"I heroically didn't touch even a crumb of mine!"

"More goose you!"

"Don't spar," interrupted Gertrude. "Here comes the first contingent!"

It was the Mayoress's carriage, and it had brought six guests--such
pathetic little people! Some of them had crutches, and could manage to
walk, but others had to be wheeled up the drive in a Bath chair, which
was waiting on purpose. A special corner of the garden, with couches and
cosy seats, had been arranged for them, and each child as it arrived was
taken there, two special hostesses being told off to look after it for
the afternoon and make it happy. Avelyn, together with Laura, found
herself in charge of a mite of a girl who looked about eight, but
declared she was nearly thirteen.

"It's the first time I've been out for ten weeks, miss," she said shyly.
"I lie on my back most days."

"What do you do? Can you read?" asked Avelyn.

"Yes, when I get any books. Our District Visitor lends me some."

"Have you ever been to school?"

"Not since I was nine. It was at school I fell and hurt my back. It's
been bad ever since."

The little visitors were evidently prepared to enjoy every moment of
their party. They were given tea almost immediately, and did full
justice to the various cakes and buns which the girls had brought for
them. They listened smiling while the gramophone blared forth
selections, and clapped their hands when the Juniors danced for their
amusement. Those who could bear the jolting went for short drives in
Vivian's pony carriage, but most of them were obliged to sit very still.
One little fellow--the cheeriest of all--lay flat on a rug, with a
cushion under his head.

As it would have been impossible to move all the children from one place
to another, their special corner had been arranged round the Surprise
Tree. The little monkey-puzzler presented a very gay appearance, for it
had been decorated with Christmas-tree ornaments, coloured balls, and
glass birds, crackers, oranges, and bags of sweets. Underneath were
piled sixty interesting-looking parcels tied up with ribbons. Mabel
Collinson, one of the Juniors, dressed as a fairy and attended by two
Brownies, suddenly made her appearance among the bushes, and going up to
the tree, began to strip its branches and hand sweets and crackers and
oranges to the expectant children. The parcels came next. There were two
apiece for them; and so well had the girls responded to the appeal for
presents that gasps of astonishment and delight followed the unwrapping
of the packages. "Oh's" and "Ah's" resounded on all sides.

"It's too lovely, miss!" beamed Avelyn's little protegee, hugging a
story-book in one arm and a work-basket in the other.

Her neighbour was rejoicing over a writing-case and a drawing-slate, and
the tiny girl on the couch was kissing a doll. It was a pretty sight to
see the poor little helpless creatures happy for one afternoon--pretty,
but so pathetic that the tears swam in Miss Thompson's eyes. The
contrast between these crippled children and her own sturdy girls seemed
so acute.

"Please, m'm," volunteered one little boy, "Lizzie over there says she
can say a piece of poetry if you'd like to hear her."

"By all means. We shall be only too pleased," returned Miss Thompson,
going across to the small reciter and asking her to begin.

Lizzie was a diminutive, white-faced specimen of ten, with a crooked
spine and big bright eyes. There was a large soul in the little body,
and it showed when she began to speak. Her piece was a patriotic one,
and she said it well. The Silverside girls who were near enough to hear
her applauded heartily, and those who were too far off to catch a word
clapped too, out of sympathy. Finding that everyone was interested, Miss
Thompson asked some of the other children to recite. Most of them were
too bashful, but one or two consented, and shyly murmured a few verses.
None, however, had the fire and spirit of Lizzie, who was quite the star
of the company. She departed, beaming with pride at having distinguished
herself, and clasping a poetry book which Miss Peters had hurriedly
fetched from her bedroom and presented to her.

"It was the nicest party we've ever had at the school," said Laura,
watching as the last of the little guests was lifted into a Bath chair
to be wheeled home. "There was no mistake about their enjoying
themselves at any rate."

"They've had the time of their lives, bless 'em!" agreed Janet.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was much to tell the Lavender Lady when Friday came round again.
Lately she had grown to be the centre of all Avelyn's actions. She was
always so ready to take a sympathetic interest in things, and
Daphne--Daphne, who of yore was the recipient of innumerable
confidences--had somehow been growing self-absorbed. She would sit and
stitch with a far-away look in her eyes, while Avelyn poured out school
news, and her occasional comments showed that she was not really
listening.

"She's getting so horribly grown-up!" complained her injured sister.
"She's not the same girl she used to be. I feel as if she had drifted
miles away in the last few months. Quite suddenly she seems ten years
older than David and Tony and me. I don't like it!"

"You must let Daphne have her innings," said Mrs. Watson. "You'll have
your own some day. She can't remain a child always. I think on the whole
she's very good to you younger ones. It's only natural she should begin
to like the society of older people now. Her life is just opening out.
You mustn't expect her to give up her whole time to yourself and the
boys. Do be nice about it, Ave! Be proud that you've got such a pretty
sister, and glad for her to enjoy herself."

That was certainly a different way of looking at it. Avelyn felt
self-reproachful. She remembered that she had not troubled to listen
when Daphne consulted her as to whether a pink or a mauve voile blouse
would look best with her new costume; just at the moment school affairs
had seemed so much more interesting than her sister's clothes.

"I suppose I'm a selfish beast!" she said to herself. "The next time
Daphne's going out to tea anywhere I'll sit in her bedroom while she
dresses and hold hairpins for her, or anything else she wants. The worst
of it is, though, she doesn't always want me! Just at present I believe
she'd any time rather have Jimmy!"

Jimmy was Daphne's little fox terrier. That is to say, he was hers
temporarily, for he really belonged to Captain Harper. She had mentioned
one day that she would like a small dog of her very own, and the young
officer had looked thoughtful. The next week he had turned up,
accompanied by Jimmy.

"I wish you'd accept him!" he said. "He's my dog, but I can't keep him
at the Camp. I've had him boarded out in Starbury since I've been
stationed here, and yesterday I went over and fetched him."

"I'll have him as a loan and take care of him till you want him again,"
agreed Daphne, "but I won't take him right away from you. It wouldn't be
fair."

"Yes, it would, if I wanted to give him. He's the best little chap out.
You'll find him a kind of epitome of the Catechism combined with all the
cardinal virtues. Jimmy, make your bow!"

The little fox terrier, which sat up and saluted at its master's word of
command, seemed a sharp and intelligent specimen of the canine race, and
when it snuggled its nose in Daphne's hand it completely conquered her
heart.

"Won't he want to run back to his master?" she asked.

"No, he has his orders and understands perfectly. I've explained the
situation to him, and you'll find he won't attempt to leave you. He's
prepared to carry a stick or an umbrella, mount guard over coats, bark
at tramps, worry rats, or demolish burglars."

Jimmy's subsequent behaviour certainly justified the character Captain
Harper had given him. Having been solemnly made over by his master, he
seemed to realize his responsibilities, and attached himself to Daphne
with all the strength of his doggy nature. His manners were excellent.
He would lie curled up on the rug at meal-times, and did not beg until
he had received express permission, only winking an occasional pathetic
eye in the direction of the table.

"I'm sure he understands every single word I say to him," said Daphne,
who idolized her new possession. "I don't know how I should get along
without him now."

"What will you do if you have to give him back?" asked Avelyn.

"It hasn't come to giving him back yet," evaded Daphne.

But on the very Saturday after the Surprise Tree party the question
cropped up. Captain Harper had come over to Walden to fulfil a promise
of making a fresh door for one of the chicken coops. He had taken
possession of the carpentry room in the cottage, and was working away at
the joiner's bench. Daphne held the wire steady, and Avelyn--with a
strong sense that she was not wanted--handed the nails. Jimmy lay at his
ease upon the shavings and yawned. His attitude of complete comfort
attracted attention.

"If you're really sent back to Starbury next month you'll have to take
him with you," commented Daphne.

"I never take back a present I've once given," answered the Captain
firmly. "We've argued that out before."

"But for Jimmy's sake? He loves you far the best still. I'm only a
makeshift."

"I assure you he doesn't."

"Then how can we tell his preference?"

"Let him decide for himself. You stand over there and I'll stand here,
and we'll both call him at once and see which he runs to."

Poor Jimmy, a much-perplexed and agitated dog, rose from his bed of
shavings and remained in the middle of the floor, whimpering and looking
with indecision towards the master who had brought him up from
puppyhood, and the sweet young mistress who had won his heart. Then he
made a rush towards the former, and, seizing him by the trouser, hauled
him across the room in the direction of Daphne.

"Jimmy has solved the matter!" said Captain Harper. "He wants us both to
own him!"

And at that point Avelyn felt that her presence grew so very _de trop_,
that she murmured some excuse about finishing her lessons, and made her
exit from the cottage, leaving her sister and Captain Harper to settle
the disputed question of ownership in their own fashion.

"I suppose this is growing up," ruminated Avelyn, as she crossed the
yard and went into the orchard. "Daphne seems to enjoy it, and I'll
give her her innings by all manner of means. How funny it would be to
have a brother-in-law! It'll come to that some day if I'm not mistaken.
No, thanks! I don't want to grow up just yet myself. Perhaps I'll change
my mind later on, but at the present time I'd ever so much rather be a
schoolgirl!"




CHAPTER XX

Pamela's Secret


In her love-making with the Lavender Lady Avelyn had, truth to tell,
rather neglected Pamela. Their friendship had always been more or less
of a spasmodic character. They often met on the road on Monday mornings,
and travelled in the same compartment of the train, and they would
return from Harlingden together on Friday afternoons. Generally they
talked the ordinary schoolgirl chatter about Silverside doings. Pamela
rarely mentioned her own concerns. Very occasionally she would make some
reference to past adventures in America, but about her present home she
was extremely reserved. She seemed to shut up and freeze at once at the
slightest allusion to Moss Cottage.

Though she had accepted several invitations to Walden, she had never
asked Avelyn to tea for a return visit. There was an air of mystery
about her that increased rather than diminished with their further
acquaintance. To Avelyn she always seemed like a disinherited princess.
She was sure that Pamela brooded over the fact that the Lyngates estate
should have been hers. Her uncle's name was never mentioned between
them.

Since the evening when he had tried to cut down the barrier over the
brook at Walden, the Watsons had seen little of Mr. Hockheimer. He had
not again attempted to interfere with their property. He seemed to spend
a good deal of his time in London, but made flying visits every week to
the Hall. People in the neighbourhood gave him the cold shoulder. Though
he was generous in subscribing to local charities, he was certainly not
popular. The general feeling was one of mistrust. Nothing certain had
ever been brought against him, but the fact of his German nationality
remained. It was whispered that but for influence in high quarters he
would have been interned.

Whether Mr. Hockheimer was or was not aware of the rumours that were
being circulated in his disfavour it was impossible to tell. He never
came to church, seldom appeared in the village. He was more strict than
ever against trespassing in his woods, though other landlords in the
district had been lax in that respect since the beginning of the war.
The Watsons disliked him so much that they avoided him whenever
possible; if they saw him walking along the village street they would
dive down a side lane or run up into the churchyard. They thoroughly
pitied Pamela for being dependent upon him.

Since the memorable morning when she had climbed over the palings into
the garden, and had hidden inside the stable, Avelyn had never visited
Moss Cottage. She was sure that she had then almost surprised some
secret. Pamela, indeed, had been on the very verge of telling her. Her
friend's confidential mood had passed, however, and a wall of reserve
had taken its place.

One Saturday Avelyn, taking out her home work, made the horrible
discovery that she had left her history in her locker at school. To go
to Miss Thompson's class with an unprepared lesson meant trouble. The
only way out of the difficulty was to walk over and borrow from Pamela,
who, though in a lower form, used the same textbook for history.

This time she did not venture to climb over the palings, but knocked at
the door in orthodox fashion. It was opened by Pamela herself, who
beamed a welcome.

"Come in! I'm all alone. Mother's gone to the station. I was just
getting horribly tired of being by myself. It's perfectly lovely to see
you! My history? Yes, you shall have it, certainly. I've learnt my
lesson. But come in and have a chat. I was sitting in the garden. Shall
we go out there?"

Avelyn much preferred the garden to the rather dark little sitting-room.
The girls went to a shady corner under a tree, where Pamela had spread a
rug and cushions. They settled themselves down leisurely and began to
talk.

"What's this you've got here?" asked Avelyn presently, taking up a
Prayer Book that was lying on the rug, opened at the last page. "Are
you studying the Table of Articles? You surely don't have to learn that
in your Scripture lesson? We did the 'Book of Common Prayer' last term,
but we didn't take the Articles."

"I'm not looking at those," said Pamela. "I'm looking at the Table of
Kindred and Affinity. I want to find out whom a man may marry and whom
he mayn't. He mustn't marry his wife's daughter's daughter, or his
brother's son's wife, or his mother's brother's wife, but may he marry
his deceased wife's deceased brother's wife?"

"Goodness, child, I'm sure I don't know! Why do you ask?"

Pamela shut the Prayer Book with a bang.

"It's Uncle!" she said vehemently. "He's behaving in such an
extraordinary way! Oh, Ave! Do you know, I believe he's trying to make
up to Mother! Don't look so incredulous! I mean it! I must tell
somebody, or I shall burst! I've kept it all in long enough. Too long!
Ave, did the boys ever tell you about that letter they found inside the
Latin dictionary? I can see by your face that they did. Well, I brought
it home and laid it on the table, and, before Mother had time to look at
it, it disappeared. Uncle had been here, and I _know_ he took it! He
must certainly have done so."

"He did! I can tell you that," returned Avelyn, and she confided to her
friend what her brothers had witnessed in the wood, how Mr. Hockheimer
had been on the point of burning the paper when Spring-heeled Jack had
appeared and run away with it. Pamela listened with intense eagerness.

"That explains so much!" she gasped. "I don't know what was in the
letter, but I imagine it may have been my grandfather's will. If it was,
and he left the estate to Daddy, no wonder Uncle Fritz tried to burn it.
He didn't quite succeed, and this bogy-spectre-highwayman, or whatever
he is, has scooted off with it. Uncle knows it's still in existence, and
that any day it might be produced, and he might be turned out of the
Hall. He's trying to guard against that, and he's playing a very deep
game. He thinks that if he were to marry Mother, as he married poor Aunt
Dora, he'd secure the estate to himself a second time."

"Does your Mother like him?"

"Not really. I believe she's frightened of him. He makes her do anything
he tells her. You don't know how dreadfully worried I am about it. If I
had him for a stepfather I should run away. I'd rather join the gipsies
than live with him. Oh, if we could only get on the track of that paper!
Has nothing more been heard of Spring-heeled Jack?"

"Nothing at all since the autumn. He appeared just for a short time, and
then vanished again."

"And no one ever knew who he was?"

"Not a soul."

Pamela gave a long sigh.

"He has the secret--whatever it is. Who knows whether I'll ever find it.
Ave," here Pamela lowered her voice, "I've got a secret too! I've been
longing and yearning to tell it to you--a dozen times I've had it on the
tip of my tongue, and then I've felt afraid and stopped. I kept waiting,
hoping to find out more, but I can't find out by myself. I want help."

"What do you mean?"

"Come, and I'll show you. We have the place to ourselves to-day. Uncle
is in town. I saw him going to the station this morning, so he's not
likely to burst in and interrupt us."

Pamela rose and led the way down the garden to the stable where Avelyn
had surprised her before. It was locked, but she took a key from a
hiding-place under a stone, and undid the padlock. She motioned her
friend to go up the ladder, and followed her. The room above was a bare
loft. It was not quite empty, however, for in the corner stood a small
table, with an object on it that looked like the receiver of a
telephone.

"Come here!" said Pamela.

She took up the instrument and placed it on her friend's head. It had a
band which fitted across the forehead, and a receiver for each ear. A
cord connected it with the wall.

"Do you hear anything?" asked Pamela.

"Yes, a sort of humming."

Pamela smiled significantly, and put back the instrument on the table.

"What is it?" breathed Avelyn, rather awed.

"Wireless messages. Uncle spends hours here."

"Do you mean to say this is a wireless station?"

Pamela nodded.

"But they're not allowed."

"I know that perfectly well."

"If it were found out he could be arrested."

"He deserves to be. Sometimes I wish he were."

"Does your mother know?"

"No, I'm sure she doesn't. She never comes to the stable, and if she did
she wouldn't climb the ladder. Sometimes Uncle is very keen about the
messages. He makes me stay here, with the receiver on my head, listening
for them, while he sits in the cottage talking to Mother, and drinking
brandy which he brings in a flask. When I hear that humming noise I have
to go and tell him, and he flies down to the stable."

"Can you understand the messages?"

"No. It's something like ordinary telegraphy, I suppose, and I don't
know the code. I wish I did."

"I can't imagine how this wireless apparatus hasn't been discovered!"

"It's so well hidden. The poles go right up among the boughs of the
tree."

"I don't think you ought to keep this secret any longer, Pam."

"No more do I, but I've never dared to tell it to a soul before. Uncle
would kill me if he knew I'd brought you in here to-day. What must I
do?"

Avelyn hesitated.

"I'd like to ask somebody. Could you come home with me this afternoon?
Can you leave the house?"

"I'd lock the door and put the key under a stone, where Mother would
find it if she gets back first. Ave, I'm just about desperate! I'd do
anything to end the life I'm living now. There's treachery of some sort
going on, I believe, and I'm being wound up in it without my knowledge
and against my will. My father gave his life for his country. Is his
daughter to help to betray it? Never! Never in this world! I'd suffer
torture first. Oh, I wish I were braver! Sometimes I'm a terrible
coward, and I feel so horribly afraid of Uncle Fritz. You don't know how
he frightens me. My nerves are all on edge."

"Come home with me, dear," said Avelyn soothingly. "If you'll let me ask
Mother, I believe she'd know what we ought to do."

Pamela was very much upset, and seemed almost hysterical. Her hands
trembled, and she wiped tell-tale drops from her eyes. She climbed down
the ladder, padlocked the stable door again, went into the house for her
hat and the history book, locked the front door, hid the key in the
rockery, and pronounced herself ready to start.

Avelyn was glad to have persuaded her so easily. Her own mind was in a
whirl. To have found a wireless telegraphy installation in the old
stable was indeed a discovery which would very seriously implicate Mr.
Hockheimer. The responsibility of the knowledge was too great to be
borne only by two schoolgirls; it must be shared by some older and wiser
person.

The friends walked silently along the road. At the corner by the oak
wood they met David and Anthony. At sight of them the boys came running
forward in much excitement.

"We've just seen Spring-heeled Jack again!" they cried.

This was indeed a piece of news. Spring-heeled Jack, who had vanished
from the neighbourhood since the autumn! For the moment it even threw
wireless telegraphy into the shade.

"Where? When?" exclaimed the girls eagerly.

"Just a minute ago. We were up the bank there after a butterfly, and he
came bounding past and jumped into the wood."

"Which way did he go?"

Anthony pointed a stumpy finger to indicate the direction. Pamela set
her teeth.

"I'm going after him," she announced.

The Watsons stared at her amazed. Spring-heeled Jack had been the terror
of the village, and Pamela was not altogether conspicuous for courage.

"I must find him! I must!" she continued. "It's the only chance of
getting that lost paper!" And climbing over the palings she scrambled
into the wood among the bracken.

The Watsons were not a family to desert a chum. David and Anthony were
after her in half a second, and Avelyn followed as quickly as her
feminine skirts allowed. Her heart was beating violently. Whether the
object of their search was human or spectral he was equally a cause for
alarm. They could hear sounds higher up the wood. Pamela was running
fast and so were the boys.

There was a sudden, unearthly yell, and a dark, masked figure came
bounding towards them in a series of wild leaps. Man, monkey, or bogy,
it jumped with incredible speed. The boys set up a shout and dashed
towards it, but it gave an enormous leap and sprang past them. It would
have got clean away but for a tangled bramble bush that broke its
course. The next moment it was sprawling among the bracken. The boys
rushed upon it, and while David pinned it down Anthony tore off the
black mask. To their utter amazement it revealed the well-known features
of their friend, Captain Harper.

At the sight of their blank faces he burst out laughing.

"The game's up at last!" he hinnied. "I saw it was you kids, and I
couldn't resist giving you a scare. I don't know that I meant to let you
find me out, though. If I hadn't tumbled I'd have got off. What have I
been masquerading like this for?" He suddenly looked grave. "That's a
little business of my own. I wanted to find out something, and I thought
I'd raise a rumour that might keep the woods clear of ordinary
trespassers. How did I do it? Easy enough, some theatrical togs I had by
me, and springs on my heels."

"We've seen you before in this rig-out," volunteered Anthony.

"When?"

"When you pounced on Mr. Hockheimer and stopped him burning a letter."

"We were there watching," echoed David.

"Oh, have you got the paper still? It was mine!" cried Pamela
breathlessly.

It was Captain Harper's turn to be astonished.

"Yours! What had it to do with you?" he asked sharply.

Pamela and Avelyn explained between them. He took a cigarette from his
pocket and lighted it as he listened.

"This is quite another development," he commented. "Part of the paper
was burnt. I couldn't understand the drift of it."

"Have you got it still?" besought Pamela.

"No, I gave it to my superior officer. But if it is of such importance
as you say I could get it examined on your behalf. I'll speak to my
Colonel about it. It's worth investigating."

"Pam!" said Avelyn impulsively, bending her head and whispering in her
friend's ear, "do you know, I believe it would be the best thing in the
world to tell Captain Harper what you've told me this afternoon. He'd
know better even than Mother what you ought to do."

"You tell him--I daren't," faltered Pamela.

If Captain Harper had been astonished before, he was doubly amazed now.

"Great Scott! It's the very thing I've been on the scent of for this six
months!" he ejaculated. "We guessed there was a wireless somewhere over
here, but never could locate it. And to think I owe it to you kids!
Pamela, you're a true loyal little Englishwoman! I think you'll find
you'll pretty soon be rid of that precious uncle of yours."

"What must I do about it?" asked Pamela, who was half crying.

Captain Harper did not at once reply. He seemed cogitating. Then his
face cleared.

"Nothing at present," he replied. "I pledge you all on your word of
honour to mention this business to nobody. We'll leave the wireless
where it is, and get the messages if possible--that's our game! Pamela,
could you manage to learn the Morse code if I taught you?"

"I'd try."

"I'll undertake you'd soon learn it. Then what you've got to do is to
listen at the receiver and report to us. I can tell you, you may be
working an uncommonly important little bit of business. Don't cry,
child! The fellow is only your uncle by marriage. He's no blood relation
of yours. Think of your father! You're doing your duty by your country
as every true-born Britisher ought."




CHAPTER XXI

Pamela's Night Walk


Pamela went back to Moss Cottage with new courage. The secret, which had
almost overwhelmed her when she had tried to bear it alone, assumed a
different aspect now she shared it with her friends. Captain Harper had
taken the full responsibility of the affair, and as one of His Majesty's
officers she knew he could be trusted. She placed herself entirely in
his hands, and followed his directions implicitly. To keep watch without
arousing her uncle's suspicions was to be her present role. Under cover
of going to tea with the Watsons, she met Captain Harper at Walden, and
learnt from him the Morse code. Once she had mastered that, she was able
to write down some of the wireless messages. To her they were absolutely
unintelligible, for they were in cipher, but she made a faithful record
of what she heard through the receiver, and sent it by David or Anthony
to the young officer.

For the moment Captain Harper acknowledged himself baffled.

"We have the keys to a number of ciphers, but there's one here we don't
understand. It's solely for this reason we're allowing this wireless
apparatus at Moss Cottage to remain where it is. Pamela must use all
her ingenuity to discover the key to the cipher. She's the only person
who has the opportunity of doing so. If we were to arrest Mr. Hockheimer
at once we might or might not find treasonable papers upon him. It is
doubtful if we should learn his secret."

To David and Anthony the affair was of the supremest interest. They
envied Pamela her unique chance of serving her country. They were glad
enough to be employed as carriers, and would take the notes from her
when they met her in the morning, and, according to arrangement, convey
them to Captain Harper. Sometimes they took them direct to the Camp,
after they returned from school, and sometimes they handed them to an
orderly who would be strolling about near the station. As for Pamela,
she lived from day to day in a ferment of expectation, waiting and
watching for her opportunity. And one evening she found it. Mr.
Hockheimer had come, as was his custom, to Moss Cottage, and had set his
niece to listen for messages while he took his ease in the house. For an
hour or more Pamela had sat with the receiver to her ears, but had heard
nothing. At last came the familiar humming. She jotted down the letters,
put the paper safely in her pocket, and ran up the garden to warn her
uncle. That night he had been drinking more heavily than usual. He
lurched in his walk as he approached the stable, and it was with
difficulty that he climbed the ladder. Pamela followed him nervously.
His hands shook as he fitted on the receiver, but he nevertheless took
down the message. Then he paused, and seemed to be calculating
something out on the paper. She crept a little nearer. He was too
muddled to realize her approach. She peeped over his shoulder unnoticed.
In his half-drunken condition he was working out the cipher and writing
it down. She copied it word by word. It was in German.

    "U-boot auf Aermelmeere heute Abend. Zeigen Licht auf
    Berry Head."

Pamela backed away cautiously towards the ladder. Just as she reached it
her uncle turned round and called to her.

"Give me a hand, Pam! Don't feel--very well to-night," he stammered
thickly. "Got to go out, too. Must go home and get the car. Little store
of petrol they don't know about! And I shan't tell them either!" (He
hinnied at his own joke.) "Give me your hand."

He leaned heavily on his niece, and she helped him down the ladder. She
watched him as he stumbled along the narrow path in the darkness. He
called to her, but she did not follow him to the cottage. Instead, she
went to the palings and scrambled over into the high road. She surmised
that she had surprised a most important secret, one which she felt must
be communicated at once to head-quarters. It was absolutely necessary
that Captain Harper should know of this. By warning him in time she
might prevent some great disaster. She must get to the Camp as quickly
as possible. It was late, long past eleven o'clock (Mr. Hockheimer had
had no compunction in keeping his niece out of bed to mind his
business), and the night was moonless. Pamela shuddered as she thought
of the long, lonely walk before her. Could she find the Camp in the
dark? A sudden inspiration struck her. She would hurry to the Watsons
instead and ask one of the boys to go on a bicycle. She ran almost all
the way along the familiar road to Walden. She found the house shut up
and the family gone to bed, but she made a rat-tat with the knocker that
soon roused them.

"What is it?" cried David out of the window.

"It's I--Pamela! I've brought news!" she gasped.

The Watsons were downstairs directly. They listened breathlessly to the
story she had to tell. David and Anthony hurried to the outhouse for
their bicycles, and set off at once for the Camp to find Captain Harper.
Who could say how much might depend on their speed?

Pamela watched them go with a feeling of intense relief. Her part of the
business was finished; she had now set the machinery in motion that
would accomplish the rest. The reaction after the intense strain was so
great that she burst into tears.

"I must go home!" she sobbed. "Mother will think I am lost!"

"Daphne and I will go with you. I can't let you walk back alone at this
time of night," said Mrs. Watson kindly. "If you'll take my advice,
dear, you'll tell your mother everything now. She ought to know."

Pamela's friends escorted her to the door of Moss Cottage and left her
there. What explanation she gave to her mother they never knew. They
feared there was great unpleasantness in store for the Reynolds, for Mr.
Hockheimer was sure to be arrested, and the fact that it must be through
his niece's instrumentality only seemed to make matters worse. David and
Anthony returned with the news that they had roused Captain Harper at
the Camp, and that after reading the message he had ridden off
immediately upon his motor bicycle. They went to bed wondering what
would be happening while they slept.

The boys looked out for Pamela next morning on the road to the station,
but she was not there. The train for once went without her. They spent
an agitated day at school and hurried back from Netherton that afternoon
at topmost speed. They found Captain Harper in the garden at Walden. He
looked very grave.

"Do you know what that message was you brought me?" he asked.
"Translated into English it meant, 'U-boat in Channel to-night. Show
light on Berry Head.' I hear a certain important vessel had an extremely
narrow escape last night. The wireless apparatus at Moss Cottage has
been taken down already. The police went up there this morning."

"And Mr. Hockheimer?"

Captain Harper knocked the end off his cigarette before he answered.

"Mr. Hockheimer has gone to settle his great account. He and his car
were found in the river at Chadwick this morning. The road turns at a
very sharp angle there on to the bridge, and it is thought that in the
darkness he missed his way and went over the bank. There is not a shadow
of doubt that he was going to give signals to the enemy. We had long
suspected him as a spy, and part of my business down here had been to
watch him. In the circumstances this has been the most merciful thing
that could have happened. For the sake of the Reynolds we are hushing
the matter up. There is no need for it to be bruited about the
neighbourhood. Your family are the only people who have any knowledge of
the affair. I can trust you to keep it from going further."

"On our honour!" the boys assured him.

The "sad fatality at Chadwick Bridge" made a sensation in the local
newspapers. An inquest was held on Mr. Hockheimer, and a verdict of
"Death from misadventure" returned. Though many people in the
neighbourhood may have had their suspicions as to the nature of his
errand on that dark night, no evidence of an incriminating nature was
brought before the coroner. He was buried at Lyngates in the Reynolds's
family vault, where his wife had been carried two years before. He had
left no will, and the question of who was to inherit the Lyngates
property might be a matter for Chancery to settle. By the advice of the
old solicitor who had managed the estate for many years, Mrs. Reynolds
and Pamela took temporary possession of the Hall until a claim could be
set up on their behalf. At the time of Squire Reynolds's death it had
been the current gossip of the village that some later will than the
one proved must be in existence. If such a will had been made, however,
it had never been found. The only possible clue seemed to be the letter
that David and Anthony had found inside the Latin dictionary, which had
fallen into the hands of Mr. Hockheimer, and had been so strangely
rescued from destruction by Captain Harper when masquerading as
Spring-heeled Jack. The latter reported that at the time he had examined
the half-burnt sheet, anticipating that it might contain treasonable
correspondence, but had been unable to make sense of it. In accordance
with instructions he had handed it over to his Colonel, and he supposed
it would now be filed in the Secret Service Department. Red tape might
prevent repossession of the original, but he was using his influence to
obtain a copy. After considerable delay a reply came from the War Office
to the effect that the paper in question appeared to have been partially
burnt, but that the remaining fragment ran as follows:--

          bitter thoughts against you, but
           love for your country has
      are, and I am ready to acknowledge your
        to see them, should they ever come to
    gones shall be bygones now. I am
      in your favour, and shall put it
        is sure to be found,
     both die, they will be provided

[Illustration: WHO COULD SAY HOW MUCH MIGHT DEPEND ON THEIR SPEED?]

"I'm afraid it's no use in a court of law, Pamela," said Captain Harper,
as he showed her the copy of the paper. "It's the merest scrap. By
imagining the missing words we might make it into something like this;
but imagination won't give it legal value. Here's what I fancy it may
have been:"

    I own I held hard and      /  bitter thoughts against you, but
    now I feel that your      /  love for your country has
    shown me what you        /  are, and I am ready to acknowledge your
    wife and child, and     /  to see them, should they ever come to
    England. By            /  gones shall be bygones now. I am
    making a new will     /  in your favour, and shall put it
    in a place where it  /  is sure to be found,
    so that should we   /  both die, they will be provided
    for.               /

"If this surmise is correct," continued Captain Harper, "and there
really was a new will, it may possibly be hidden somewhere at the Hall."

"We've searched everywhere," said Pamela sadly. "Two lawyer's clerks
have been here and gone through every morsel of paper in the house, and
turned out every drawer and cupboard. I think myself that perhaps Uncle
Fritz may have found it and destroyed it. Mother and I spend all our
spare time looking, but we never have any luck. I don't think we're
lucky people. We seem just to have misfortune after misfortune. It has
always been like this all our lives."

"Cheer up! It's a long lane that has no turning," comforted Captain
Harper. "I advise you to show this paper to your solicitor, though I'm
afraid it's nothing to go by."

Pamela's affairs did indeed seem to have reached a crisis. Her fortunes
were much discussed in the neighbourhood, and general opinion decided
that she would have difficulty in establishing legally her right to what
undoubtedly ought to be hers. Several naturalized German relations of
Mr. Hockheimer had put in counter-claims for the estate. There was
likely to be a long and expensive lawsuit before the case was settled.

Then one day a wonderful thing occurred--an utterly unexpected and
marvellous thing, but one that--thank God!--has happened in other
families since the war began. The postwoman who delivered the letter did
not know that it differed from other letters; she popped it through the
slit in the front door and rang the bell as usual, and went on her way,
all unsuspecting what news she had left behind her. Yet when Mrs.
Reynolds saw the handwriting on the envelope she gave a little sharp cry
and fainted away. Pamela did not go to school that day nor the next. She
wrote to Avelyn to explain her absence. The latter read the letter twice
before her amazed brain could really grasp its contents.

    "MY DEAR AVE,

    "I hardly know how to tell you our good luck. Daddy is alive! He
    wasn't killed at Mons after all. He was taken prisoner and never
    reported. He was kept most fearfully strictly in a fortress and
    allowed no news of the outside world. He and a companion spent
    eighteen months making a tunnel out of their cell, and after
    simply thrilling adventures they escaped, and swam a river and
    got into Swiss territory. He's coming home, and Mother and I are
    going up to London to meet him. We're almost off our heads!

    "Will you please tell Miss Thompson this is why I'm not at
    school? We start for town to-morrow morning.

        "Much love from
            "PAM."

It was indeed a most happy ending to all the troubles of poor Mrs.
Reynolds and Pamela. By the will which had already been proved, Captain
Reynolds inherited his father's estate, which had only passed to the
daughter Dora in default of a male heir. He was soon able to settle up
the legal side of the matter and to obtain formal possession of the
whole property.

"I've made my own will now, and left everything safely tied up for you
and your Mother before I go out to the front again," he told his
daughter.

"Oh, Daddy! must you leave us and go back to France?" wailed Pamela.

"Every hour I spent in that fortress, Pam, made me all the more resolved
to help to fight this war to the finish. Would you want me to shirk and
fail my country? I know you better than that. Tell me again what you
told me in 1914."

And Pamela stood up straight, and with a light in her eyes repeated:

    "Though it tear and break my heart
       I let you go.
     When the Motherland is calling,
       Be it so!
     Let my own poor need and grief
       Be set aside,
     That justice and the right
       May now abide.

    "God put courage and true might
       In your arm!
     May His mercy keep your life
       Safe from harm!
     Every hour my earnest prayer
       Shall be this:
     May we meet and greet again
       With a kiss."




CHAPTER XXII

The Lecture Hall is Dedicated


Ever since the laying of the foundation stone in January the new Lecture
Hall had been in process of construction. Owing to the war, and the
scarcity of labour, it made slow progress. Sometimes the building went
on with a spurt, and sometimes for weeks nothing at all was done. Those
optimists who had prophesied that it would be in readiness after the
Easter holidays found themselves much mistaken. After innumerable delays
and disappointments, however, the place was finished by the end of the
summer term, and Miss Thompson decided to combine its opening with the
annual prize-giving.

The double function marked a great occasion in the annals of the school.
The increased accommodation would allow a large gathering, and many
invitations were sent forth. It was even whispered that the chair was to
be taken by the local Member of Parliament.

"Silverside's coming on no end!" said Consie Arkwright. "We never used
to have such grandees down. Miss Thompson used to be content with some
ordinary clergyman or elderly professor, to give the prizes, and now
she won't look at anybody below a bishop, or a mayor, or an M.P."

"She loves these functions!" chuckled Joyce. "She's perfectly happy when
she has on her best dress and her company smile, and is showing off the
school to an admiring crowd of visitors. I won't say that I don't rather
enjoy it myself. It makes one feel in the world somehow. It's jolly nice
to think that Silverside is of so much importance in the town."

"Bet we'll make a good show-up on Dedication Day!" commented Laura, who
had drifted into the conversation. "Hopscotch was saying something about
the whole school in white dresses and our badges. By the by, Miss
Thompson's got a little surprise for us. She's been having some
beautiful ribbon, in the school colours, specially woven for Silverside.
She showed it to Adah and me this morning in the study, and I can tell
you it's topping! We're each to have a piece of it for our hair, and
wear it on the great day, so that we all look alike. She's having new
hat bands woven, too, for next term. I think they'll be rather smart."

"I begin to wish I wasn't leaving," said Isobel almost mournfully.
"Really, Silverside has been much jollier lately than it used to be. It
would have been ripping fun to stop another year and work up the hockey,
as we've done the cricket and tennis."

"There'll be something to read out in the Games Report this time!"
purred Joyce.

"It'll be precious!" agreed Consie.

The Principal was naturally anxious that her pupils should make
a good display on so important an occasion. She arranged a very
carefully-thought-out programme of the ceremony. There were to be
speeches by local magnates, the School Report must be read, the hall
dedicated, and the prizes distributed. She decided that her pupils ought
to sing one or two suitable songs, and she came in to the singing class
one morning to discuss the matter with Miss Webster, and hear the girls
run through a few glees. She found it difficult to make a choice.

"They're nice in their way, but not altogether what is needed. I should
have liked something really appropriate to a Dedication. In fact, I'm
afraid I want what I am not at all likely to get--a special song
composed for Silverside."

"Could we adapt anything?" suggested Miss Webster, rapidly turning over
a pile of music, while the class, deeply interested, sat listening to
the discussion.

"Not much use without new words. Pity we have no poet in the school! If
there had been time, I'd have written to a music publisher and asked if
it would be possible to have a song composed for us. It's too late now.
I wish I'd thought of it sooner!"

"Oh, Miss Thompson," said Avelyn, suddenly springing to her feet and
blushing hotly at her own temerity, "I know a lady who writes songs!
She's very much interested in Silverside--I've told her so much about
it. I really believe if I asked her she'd make up just what you want.
She's quite clever enough to do it."

Miss Thompson's convex glasses were focused on Avelyn in a stare of
astonished gratification. She literally jumped at the idea.

"If you think your friend would really be so kind," she assented, "we
should be most grateful to her. Where does she live? At Lyngates? Then
write to her this afternoon, and see if you can persuade her to take
pity on us. I suppose she would know the sort of thing we want?"

"I'll explain exactly," promised Avelyn, sitting down, conscious that in
the eyes of the class she had covered herself with glory. She was
excused "English language" that afternoon for the purpose of writing her
letter to Miss Carrington, and sat with her blotter--an object of much
envy--while the remainder of the form wrestled with Anglo-Saxon
derivations.

"I don't think my Lavender Lady will fail me!" she murmured as she
stamped her envelope. "I believe it's just the sort of thing she'll like
doing."

Avelyn's trust in her friend was amply justified. She received by return
of post a card bearing the words: "Highly honoured. Will do my best."

"I knew she would--the dear, clever darling!" rejoiced Avelyn, waving
her post card in triumph as she ran down to the study to communicate the
good news to Miss Thompson.

On Friday evening, when Avelyn called at the bungalow, the Lavender Lady
had a neat music manuscript ready for her.

"I hope it will do," she said. "It's as far as possible what you asked
me for. I've tried to express a spirit of school patriotism and union in
the words, which seems to be the principal thing to aim at just now, and
I've arranged the music for three voices. You'll have to make copies of
it at school."

"Miss Peters will do that with the duplicator," beamed Avelyn. "I do
think you're just the most absolutely lovely and clever and delicious
person that I've ever met, or ever shall meet, in all this wide world!
How do you manage to think of things? I couldn't compose a song to save
my life!"

"Why, I really don't know! The ideas just float into my head somehow,"
laughed the Lavender Lady. "As a matter of fact, this tune came to me in
bed, at about half-past two in the morning, and I was obliged to get up
and go downstairs to the piano to try it over and jot it down on paper
before I forgot it. I knew that if I went to sleep again it would escape
me. There's nothing so elusive as music. Yes, I'll try it over for you
if you like. It'll sound much better, though, in three parts. I hope
your first sopranos can reach A sharp? If not, I must set it in a lower
key, but I like it best in this."

"They've got to get A sharp if they crack their voices!" decided Avelyn
firmly.

The dedication and prize giving were to be held on the last afternoon of
the term, and guests were invited for 2.30 prompt. The girls,
resplendent in white dresses and the new hair ribbons, made a brave
show, and all were sitting discreetly in their places when the
distinguished visitors were ushered on to the platform.

During the last six months a better tone and discipline had pervaded the
school, and there had been no repetition of the disorderly scene that
had preceded the laying of the foundation stone. Every pupil of
Silverside now prided herself upon her manners. It had become a matter
of _noblesse oblige_.

Mr. Robson, the Member of Parliament for Harlingden, was a short, stout
man, with a bald head and a big moustache, and some gift of oratory. He
fulfilled with dignity his duties as chairman, and made a capital
speech, bringing in his views about education, and wishing Silverside
every success. A hundred and ten youthful pairs of hands clapped
obediently, though some of the most junior heads had not altogether
grasped the drift of the remarks.

It was now the turn of the School Report. Miss Thompson, typed papers in
hand, was standing up and clearing her throat preparatory to reading it
aloud.

Avelyn, in the fifth row from the front, turned her head and took a
comprehensive glance round the room. It was certainly a hall to be proud
of, looking both stately and festive with its decorations of flowers and
flags and its large palms upon the platform. She was glad that the
Lavender Lady should see it. Miss Carrington had come to the gathering
with Mrs. Watson and Daphne; Captain Harper and Captain and Mrs.
Reynolds were sitting next to them. They caught Avelyn's eye, and smiled
as she looked across, then concentrated their attention on the platform,
where Miss Thompson was beginning to read the report.

The Principal first of all described the general work of the school,
what successes had been gained in public examinations, and what record
each Form could show. The average of marks was high, and both mistresses
and pupils might be congratulated on their efforts during the year.
After commenting on the improvement which had also been made in music,
part singing, drawing, and painting, Miss Thompson passed to the subject
of games.

"I am very glad to say," so ran the report, "that on its athletic as
well as its intellectual side the school is now holding its own. During
the winter season little was done in that respect, but with the spring a
great games revival took place, and the 'Loyal School League' was
instituted, the object of which was to win honours for Silverside. I
heartily congratulate the League both on the spirit of union and school
patriotism which it has fostered and on the successes which it has won.
The cricket throughout has been most spirited, and great thanks are due
to Miss Leslie and Miss Kennedy for their admirable help in coaching.
Out of six matches the school scored four victories, a very creditable
record for a first season. In tennis also we are beginning to take our
place. The improvement of the general play is most marked, and we hope
to have established a new standard of energy and efficiency. Our
champions were successful in defeating Pendlebury Ladies' College and
Westfield High School; a match was also played with the Clifford Girls'
Grammar School, which resulted in a draw. As we consider games to be an
extremely important item in our curriculum, we hope that this term's
strenuous effort has established a precedent in this respect, and that
the League will go on to greater triumphs in the future."

After the report came the distribution of prizes and Form trophies. VA
won a beautiful picture for a wild-flower competition; IVB gained the
cup for general improvement; and the Sixth the shield for knowledge of
contemporary events; while among individual successes Adah Gartley,
Annie Broadside, Maggie Stuart, Laura Talbot, and Irma Ridley were
called up to receive rewards of books.

"I am asked to announce," said the chairman, "that Miss Thompson and the
mistresses have presented a new gift to the school. This beautiful
silver cup is to be awarded annually to the girl who is considered to
have performed the greatest service for Silverside during the year. The
first to win it is Avelyn Watson, to whose enterprise and energy in
initiating the 'Loyal School League' much of the present success in
games may fairly be credited. I congratulate you," beaming at Avelyn as
he handed her the trophy, "that yours is the first name to be engraved
upon the cup."

Avelyn walked back to her place almost overwhelmed by the unexpected
honour. It was a complete surprise, for the mistresses had kept their
secret well, and had allowed no word of it to leak out beforehand. The
storm of clapping from the girls showed that the trophy, and the choice
of its winner, were equally appreciated. There could be no mistake about
the genuine cordiality of the applause.

"May I say, in conclusion," finished Mr. Robson, "that the part song
which will now be rendered by the singing class has been composed
specially for this occasion by a well-known musician, and that
henceforward it will take its place as what we might call the national
anthem of Silverside, to be sung at all school functions."

Miss Webster struck a chord on the piano, and the singing class rose.
The sunlight flooding through the window shone on their white dresses
and the colours that tied their hair. There were a few bars of prelude,
then, to a swinging, rousing, and most original tune, they sang:

        "Girls of Silverside!
          Hear us as we sing:
        With the praises of our school
          Let the rafters ring.
        Loyal hearts and true
          Bring we here to-day,
        Chanting as our battle-cry,
          'Silverside for aye!'
    So join your hands and join your hearts,
      And form a circle wide,
    Let Silverside be all your pride,
      Girls of Silverside!

        "Girls of Silverside!
          True you are and leal,
        Each must strive her noble best
          For the common weal.
        Banish thoughts of self,
          Make your interests wide,
        Be the glory that you gain
          All for Silverside.
    So join your hands and join your hearts,
      And form a circle wide,
    Let Silverside be all your pride,
      Girls of Silverside!

        "Girls of Silverside!
          For the good and right,
        Here and in the wider world
          Let us all unite.
        To your strenuous care
          Our honour we confide,
        Let your lives be such as bring
          Praise to Silverside.
    So join your hands and join your hearts,
      And form a circle wide,
    Let Silverside be all your pride,
      Girls of Silverside!"

When the function was over, and mistresses, visitors, and girls streamed
out of the new Lecture Hall, Avelyn's steps gravitated at once towards
her Lavender Lady.

"Your song was beautiful," she whispered. "Everybody says it's the best
tune they've heard for ages--it haunts us, we can't get it out of our
heads for a minute! Miss Webster says she could play it in her sleep. It
was just what we wanted--something specially for Silverside!"

"I'm glad it went off all right. Let me look at your cup. You lucky
girl! Just to think that 'Avelyn Watson' is the very first name to be
engraved upon it! Where are you going to keep such a treasure?"

"I shall take it home for the holidays, and then have it in our form
room next term. If you don't mind, I'd like it to spend a week at the
bungalow. I feel it was you who really won it, not I. The League was
your idea entirely. Even if I'd thought of it I should never have had
the courage to propose it, if it hadn't been for you. You inspired it
all! May the cup stand on your mantelpiece for a whole week?"

"Only on one condition--that you come and stay with me to take care of
it!"

"Oh! may I? I'd love to stay with you and have you all to myself."
Avelyn's eyes were shining.

"Hallo, old sport!" said Laura, coming rollicking up with Irma, Janet,
Mona, and a few other congenial spirits. "Congratulations! We didn't
know Miss Thompson had this cup up her sleeve, did we? Jolly decent of
her and the mistresses, I must say! We ought to subscribe and buy a
bracket to put it on. Won't it look fine when it's up, rather! Some of
the old girls are here to-day, and Miss Thompson's been telling them
about the League. They think it's topping!"

"And they say our hair ribbons are just too jinky for anything," added
Janet.

"Glad to hear they like them," said Avelyn, twisting round her plait
and readjusting the broad bow of pink, blue, and navy. "Yes, on the
whole, I really think it's rather priceless to have our hair tied with
the school colours."

"It stands for so much," put in the Lavender Lady gently.

"Right you are! We're all hall-marked safe and sound now for a united
Silverside," agreed Laura. "Next term our school will just forge ahead
and break the record."




Printed and Bound in Great Britain
_By Blackie & Son, Limited, Glasgow_




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

    Hyphenation has been retained as it appears in the original
    publication. Punctuation has been made consistent.

    Page  41 and an upper story containing _changed to_
             and an upper storey containing

    Page 157 I wonder we've not see you _changed to_
             I wonder we've not seen you

    Page 171 All four girls were busy packing _changed to_
             All five girls were busy packing



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR THE SCHOOL COLOURS***


******* This file should be named 35972.txt or 35972.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/5/9/7/35972



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

