The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wheat Princess, by Jean Webster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Wheat Princess

Author: Jean Webster

Release Date: September 3, 2014 [EBook #46761]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHEAT PRINCESS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






[Illustration]
[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          _BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

                         DEAR ENEMY
                         DADDY LONG LEGS
                         JUST PATTY
                         PATTY AND PRISCILLA
                         THE FOUR POOLS MYSTERY
                         JERRY
                         MUCH ADO ABOUT PETER

                                 LONDON
                          HODDER AND STOUGHTON

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  THE
                             WHEAT PRINCESS

                                   By
                              JEAN WEBSTER
        Author of 'Daddy Long Legs,' 'Just Patty,' 'Dear Enemy'


                          HODDER AND STOUGHTON
                         LIMITED        LONDON

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                O. HENRY

        "The time is coming, let us hope, when the whole
        English-speaking world will recognise in O. HENRY one
        of the greatest masters of modern fiction."

                                                        STEPHEN LEACOCK.

                   HODDER & STOUGHTON publish all the
                   books by O. HENRY in their famous
                             Popular Series

                         THE FOUR MILLION
                         THE TRIMMED LAMP
                         SIXES AND SEVENS
                         STRICTLY BUSINESS
                         ROADS OF DESTINY
                         CABBAGES AND KINGS
                         HEART OF THE WEST
                         THE GENTLE GRAFTER
                         OPTIONS
                         WHIRLIGIGS
                         THE VOICE OF THE CITY
                         ROLLING STONES

                                 Cloth
                      LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PROLOGUE


IF you leave the city by the Porta Maggiore and take the Via
Praenestina, which leads east into the Sabine hills, at some thirty-six
kilometers' distance from Rome you will pass on your left a grey-walled
village climbing up the hillside. This is Palestrina, the old Roman
Praeneste; and a short distance beyond--also on the left--you will find
branching off from the straight Roman highway a steep mountain road,
which, if you stick to it long enough, will take you, after many
windings, to Castel Madama and Tivoli.

Several kilometers along this road you will see shooting up from a bare
crag above you a little stone hamlet crowned by the ruins of a
mediaeval fortress. The town--Castel Vivalanti--was built in the days
when a stronghold was more to be thought of than a water-supply, and
its people, from habit or love, or perhaps sheer necessity, have lived
on there ever since, going down in the morning to their work in the
plain and toiling up at night to their homes on the hill. So steep is
its site that the doorway of one house looks down on the roof of the
house below, and its narrow stone streets are in reality flights of
stairs. The only approach is from the front, by a road which winds and
unwinds like a serpent and leads at last to the Porta della Luna,
through which all of the traffic enters the town. The gate is
ornamented with the crest of the Vivalanti--a phoenix rising out of the
flame, supported by a heavy machicolated top, from which, in the old
days, stones and burning oil might be dropped upon the heads of the
unwelcome guests.

The town is a picturesque little affair--it would be hard to find a
place more so in the Sabine villages, it is very, very poor. In the
march of the centuries it has fallen out of step and been left far
behind; to look at it, one would scarcely dream that on the clear days
the walls and towers of modern Rome are in sight on the horizon. But in
its time Castel Vivalanti was not insignificant. This little hamlet has
entertained history within its walls. It has bodily outfaced robber
barons and papal troops. It has been besieged and conquered, and, alas,
betrayed--and that by its own prince. Twice has it been razed to the
ground and twice rebuilt. In one way or another, though, it has
weathered the centuries, and it stands to-day grey and forlorn,
clustering about the walls of its donjon and keep.

Castel Vivalanti, as in the middle ages, still gives the title to a
Roman prince. The house of Vivalanti was powerful in its day, and the
princes may often be met with--not always to their credit--in the
history of the Papal States. They were oftener at war than at peace
with the holy see, and there is the story of one pope who spent four
weary months watching the view from a very small window in Vivalanti's
donjon. But, in spite of their unholy quarrels, they were at times
devout enough, and twice a cardinal's hat has been worn in the family.
The house of late years has dwindled somewhat, both in fortune and
importance; but, nevertheless, Vivalanti is a name which is still
spoken with respect among the old nobles of Rome.

The lower slopes of the hill on which the village stands are well
wooded and green with stone-pines and cypresses, olive orchards and
vineyards. Here the princes built their villas when the wars with the
popes were safely at an end and they could risk coming down from their
stronghold on the mountain. The old villa was built about a mile below
the town, and the gardens were laid out in terraces and parterres along
the slope of the hill. It has long been in ruin, but its foundations
still stand, and the plan of the gardens may easily be traced. You will
see the entrance at the left of the road--a massive stone gateway
topped with moss-covered urns and a double row of cone-shaped cypresses
bordering a once stately avenue now grown over with weeds. If you pause
for a moment--and you cannot help doing so--you will see, between the
portals at the end of the avenue, some crumbling arches, and even, if
your eyes are good, the fountain itself.

Any contadino that you meet on the road will tell you the story of the
old Villa Vivalanti and the 'Bad Prince' who was (by the grace of God)
murdered two centuries ago. He will tell you--a story not uncommon in
Italy--of storehouses bursting with grain while the peasants were
starving, and of how, one moonlight night, as the prince was strolling
on the terrace contentedly pondering his wickednesses of the day, a
peasant from his own village up on the mountain, creeping behind him,
quiet as a cat, stabbed him in the back and dropped his body in the
fountain. He will tell you how the light from the burning villa was
seen as far as Rocca di Papa in the Alban hills; and he will add, with
a laugh and a shrug, that some people say when the moon is full the old
prince comes back and sits on the edge of the fountain and thinks of
his sins, but that, for himself, he thinks it an old woman's tale.
Whereupon he will cast a quick glance over his shoulder at the dark
shadow of the cypresses and covertly cross himself as he wishes you,
'_A revederla_.'

You cannot wonder that the young prince (two centuries ago) did not
build his new villa on the site of the old; for even had he, like the
brave contadino, cared nothing for ghosts, still it was scarcely a
hallowed spot, and lovers would not care to stroll by the fountain. So
it happens that you must travel some distance further along the same
road before you reach the gates of the new villa, built anno domini
1693, in the pontificate of his Holiness Innocent XII. Here you will
find no gloomy cypresses: the approach is bordered by spreading
plane-trees. The villa itself is a rambling affair, and, though
slightly time-worn, is still decidedly imposing, with its various
wings, its balconies and loggia and marble terrace.

The new villa--for such one must call it--faces west and north. On the
west it looks down over olive orchards and vineyards to the Roman
Campagna, with the dome of St. Peter's a white speck in the distance,
and, beyond it, to a narrow, shining ribbon of sea. On the north it
looks up to the Sabine mountains, with the height of Soracte rising
like an island on the horizon. For the rest, it is surrounded by laurel
and ilex groves with long shady walks and leafy arbors, with fountains
and cascades and broken statues all laid out in the stately formality
of the seventeenth century. But the trees are no longer so carefully
trimmed as they were a century ago; the sun rarely shines in these
green alleys, and the nightingales sing all day. Through every season,
but especially in the springtime, the garden-borders are glowing with
colour. Hedges of roses, oleanders and golden laburnum, scarlet
pomegranate blossoms and red and white camellias, marguerites and
lilies and purple irises, bloom together in flaming profusion. And
twice a year, in the spring and the autumn, the soft yellow walls of
the villa are covered with lavender wistaria and pink climbing roses,
and every breeze is filled with their fragrance.

It is a spot in which to dream of old Italy, of cardinals and pages and
gorgeous lackeys, of gallant courtiers and beautiful ladies, of Romeos
and Juliets trailing back and forth over the marble terrace and making
love under the Italian moon. But if there have been lovers, as is
doubtless the case, there have also been haters among the Vivalanti,
and you may read of more than one prince murdered by hands other than
those of his peasants. The walls of the new villa, in the course of
their two hundred years, have looked down on their full share of
tragedies, and the Vivalanti annals are grim reading withal.

And now, having pursued the Vivalanti so far, you may possibly be
disappointed to hear that the story has nothing to do with them. But if
you are interested in learning more of the family you can find his
Excellency Anastasio di Vivalanti, the present prince and the last of
the line, any afternoon during the season in the casino at Monte Carlo.
He is a slight young man with a dark, sallow face and many fine lines
under his eyes.

Then why, you may ask, if we are not concerned with the Vivalanti, have
we lingered so long in their garden? Ah--but the garden does concern
us, though the young prince may not; and it is a pleasant spot, you
must acknowledge, in which to linger. The people with whom we are
concerned are (I hesitate to say it for fear of destroying the glamour)
an American family. Yes, it is best to confess it boldly--are American
millionaires. It is out--the worst is told! But why, may I ask in my
turn, is there anything so inherently distressing in the idea of an
American family (of millionaires) spending the summer in a
seventeenth-century Italian villa up in the Sabine hills--especially
when the rightful heir prefers _trente-et-un_ at Monte Carlo? Must they
of necessity spoil the romance? They are human, and have their passions
like the rest of us; and one of them at least is young, and men have
called her beautiful--yes, in this very garden.




                               CHAPTER I


IT was late and the studio was already well filled when two new-comers
were ushered into the room--one a woman still almost young, and still
(in a kindly light) beautiful; the other a girl emphatically young, her
youth riding triumphant over other qualities which in a few years would
become significant. A slight, almost portentous, hush had fallen over
the room as they crossed the threshold and shook hands with their host.
In a group near the door a young man--it was Laurence Sybert, the first
secretary of the American Embassy--broke off in the middle of a
sentence with the ejaculation: 'Ah, the Wheat Princess!'

'Be careful, Sybert! She will hear you,' the grey-haired
consul-general, who stood at his elbow, warned.

Sybert responded with a laugh and a half-shrug; but his tones, though
low, had carried, and the girl flashed upon the group a pair of vivid
hazel eyes containing a half-puzzled, half-questioning light, as though
she had caught the words but not the meaning. Her vague expression
changed to one of recognition; she nodded to the two diplomats as she
turned away to welcome a delegation of young lieutenants, brilliant in
blue and gold and shining boots.

'Who is she?' another member of the group inquired as he adjusted a
pair of eye-glasses and turned to scrutinize the American girl--she was
American to the most casual observer, from the piquant details of her
gown to the masterly fashion in which she handled her four young men.

'Don't you know?' There was just a touch of irony in Sybert's tone.
'Miss Marcia Copley, the daughter of the American Wheat King--I fancy
you've seen his name mentioned in the papers.'

'Well, well! And so that's Willard Copley's daughter?' He readjusted
his glasses and examined her again from this new point of view. 'She
isn't bad-looking,' was his comment. 'The Wheat Princess!' He repeated
the phrase with a laugh. 'I suppose she has come over to marry an
Italian prince and make the title good?'

The originator of the phrase shrugged anew, with the intimation that it
was nothing to him who Miss Marcia Copley married.

'And who is the lady with her?'

It was Melville, the consul-general, who replied.

'Her aunt, Mrs. Howard Copley. They live in the Palazzo Rosicorelli.'

'Ah, to be sure! Yes, yes, I know who they are. Her husband's a
reformer or a philanthropist, or something of the sort, isn't he? I've
seen him at the meets. I say, you know,' he added, with an appreciative
smile, 'that's rather good, the way the two brothers balance each
other. Philanthropist and Wheat King!'

An English girl in the group turned and studied the American girl a
moment with a critical scrutiny. Marcia Copley's appearance was
daintily attractive. Her hat and gown and furs were a burnished brown
exactly the colour of her hair; every little accessory of her dress was
unobtrusively fastidious. Her whole bearing, her easy social grace,
spoke of a past in which the way had been always smoothed by money. She
carried with her a touch of imperiousness, a large air of commanding
the world. The English girl noted these things with jealous feminine
eyes.

'Really,' she said, 'I don't see how she has the audacity to face
people. I should think that every beggar in the street would be a
reproach to her.'

'There were beggars in Italy long before Willard Copley cornered
wheat,' Melville returned.

'If what the _Tribuna_ says is true,' some one ventured, 'Howard Copley
is as much implicated as his brother.'

'I dare say,' another laughed; 'millionaire philanthropists have a way
of taking back with the left hand what they have given with the right.'

Sybert had been listening in a half-indifferent fashion to the
strictures on the niece, but in response to the implied criticism of
the uncle he shook his head emphatically.

'Howard Copley is no more implicated in the deal than I am,' he
declared. 'He and his brother have had nothing to do with each other
for the last ten years. His philanthropy is honest, and his money is as
clean as any fortune can be.'

The statement was not challenged. Sybert was known to be Howard
Copley's friend, and he further carried the reputation of being a warm
partizan on the one or two subjects which engaged his enthusiasm--on
those which did not engage it he was nonchalant to a degree for a
rising diplomat.

The two--Sybert and the consul-general--with a nod to the group
presently drifted onward toward the door. The secretary was bent upon
departure at the earliest possible opportunity. Teas were a part of the
official routine of his life, but by the simple device of coming late
and leaving early he escaped as much of their irksomeness as possible.
Aside from being secretary of the Embassy, Sybert was a nephew of the
ambassador, and it was the latter calling which he found the more
onerous burden of the two. His Excellency had formed a troublesome
habit of shifting social burdens to the unwilling shoulders of the
younger man.

They paused at Mrs. Copley's elbow with outstretched hands, and were
received with a flattering show of cordiality from the aunt, though
with but a fleeting nod from the niece; she was, patently, too
interested in her officers to have much attention left.

'Where is your husband?' Sybert asked.

The lady raised her eyebrows in a picturesque gesture.

'Beggars,' she sighed. 'Something has happened to the beggars again.'
Mr. Copley's latest philanthropic venture had been the 'Anti-Begging
Society.' Bread-tickets had been introduced, the beggars were being
hunted down and given work, and as a result Copley's name was cursed
from end to end of Rome.

The men smilingly murmured their commiserations.

'And what are you two diplomats doing here?' Mrs. Copley asked. 'I
thought that Mr. Dessart invited only artists to his teas.'

Sybert's gloomy air, as he eyed the door, reflected the question. It
was Melville who answered:

'Oh, we are admirers of art, even if we are not practitioners. Besides,
Mr. Dessart and I are old friends. We used to know each other in
Pittsburg when he was a boy and I was a good deal younger than I am
now.'

His gaze rested for a moment upon their host, who formed one of the
hilarious group about Miss Copley. He was an eminently picturesque
young fellow, fitted with the usual artist attributes--a velveteen
jacket, a flowing necktie, and rather long light-brown hair which
constantly got into his eyes, causing him to shake his head impatiently
as he talked. He had an open, frank face, humorous blue eyes and the
inestimable, eager air of being in love with life.

The conversation showing signs of becoming general, the officers, with
visible reluctance, made their bows and gave place to the new-comers.
The girl now found time to extend a cordial hand to Melville, while to
the secretary she tossed a markedly careless, 'Good afternoon, Mr.
Sybert.' If Miss Marcia's offhand manner conveyed something a trifle
stronger than indifference, so Sybert's half-amused smile as he talked
to her suggested that her unkindness failed to hurt; that she was too
young to count.

'And what is this I hear about your moving out to a villa for the
spring?' he inquired, turning to Mrs. Copley.

'Yes, we are thinking of it, but it is not decided yet.'

'We still have Uncle Howard to deal with,' added the girl. 'He was the
first one who suggested a villa, but now that exactly the right one
presents itself, we very much suspect him of trying to back out.'

'That will never do, Miss Marcia,' said Melville. 'You must hold him to
his word.'

'We are going out to-morrow to inspect it, and if Aunt Katherine and I
are pleased----' She broke off with a graceful gesture which intimated
much.

Sybert laughed. 'Poor Uncle Howard!' he murmured.

The arrival of fresh guests called their host away, and Mrs. Copley and
Melville, turning aside to greet some friends, left Miss Copley for the
moment to a _tete a tete_ with Sybert. He maintained his side of the
conversation in a half-perfunctory fashion, while the girl allowed a
slight touch of hostility to creep beneath her animation.

'And where is the villa to be, Miss Marcia--at Frascati, I suppose?'

'Farther away than Frascati; at Castel Vivalanti.'

'Castel Vivalanti!'

'Up in the Sabine hills between Palestrina and Tivoli.'

'Oh, I know where it is; I have a vivid recollection of climbing the
hill on a very hot day. I was merely exclaiming at the locality; it's
rather remote, isn't it?'

'Its remoteness is the best thing about it. Our object in moving into
the hills is to escape from visitors, and if we go no farther than
Frascati we shan't do much escaping.'

This to the family's most frequent visitor was scarcely a hospitable
speech, and a smile of amusement crept to the corners of Sybert's mouth.

Apparently just becoming aware of the content of her speech, she added
with slightly exaggerated sweetness: 'Of course I don't mean you, Mr.
Sybert. You come so often that I regard you as a member of the
household.'

The secretary apparently had it on his tongue to retort, but, thinking
better of it, he maintained a discreet silence, while their host
approached with the new arrivals--a lady whose name Miss Copley did not
catch, but who was presented with the explanatory remark, 'she writes,'
and several young men who, she judged by their neckties, were artists
also. The talk turned on the villa again, and Miss Copley was called
upon for a description.

'I haven't seen it myself,' she returned; 'but from the steward's
account it is the most complete villa in Italy. It has a laurel walk
and an ilex grove, balconies, fountains, a marble terrace, a view, and
even a ghost.'

'A ghost?' queried Dessart. 'But I thought they were extinct--that the
railroads and tourists had driven them all back to the grave.'

'Not the ghost of the "Bad Prince"; we rent him with the place--and the
most picturesque ghost you ever dreamed of! He hoarded his wheat while
the peasants were starving, and they murdered him two hundred years
ago.' She repeated the story, mimicking in inimitable fashion the
gestures and broken English of Prince Vivalanti's steward.

A somewhat startled silence hung over the close of the recital, while
her auditors glanced at each other in secret amazement. The question
uppermost in their minds was whether it was ignorance or mere bravado
that had tempted her into repeating just that particular tale. It was a
subject which Miss Copley might have been expected to avoid. Laurence
Sybert alone was aware that she did not know what a dangerous topic she
was venturing on, and he received the performance with an appreciative
laugh.

'A very picturesque story, Miss Copley. The old fellow got what he
deserved.'

Marcia Copley assented with a smiling gesture, and the woman who wrote
skilfully bridged over a second pause.

'You were complaining the other day, Mr. Dessart, that the foreigners
are making the Italians too modern. Why do you not catch the ghost? He
is surely a true antique.'

'But I am not an impressionist,' he pleaded.

'Who is saying anything against impressionists?' a young man asked in
somewhat halting English as he paused beside the group.

'No one,' said Dessart; 'I was merely disclaiming all knowledge of them
and their ways. Miss Copley, allow me to present Monsieur Benoit, the
last _Prix de Rome_--he is the man to paint your ghost. He's an
impressionist and paints nothing else.'

'I suppose you have ghosts enough in the Villa Medici, without having
to search for them in the Sabine hills.'

'Ah, _oui_, mademoiselle; the Villa Medici has ghosts of many
kinds--ghosts of dead hopes and dead ambitions among others.'

'I should think the ghost of a dead ambition might be too illusive for
even an impressionist to catch,' she returned.

'Perhaps an impressionist is better acquainted with them than with
anything else,' suggested Dessart, a trifle unkindly.

'Not when he's young and a _Prix de Rome_,' smiled the woman who wrote.

Mrs. Copley requiring her niece's presence on the other side of the
room, the girl nodded to the group and withdrew. The writer looked
after her with an air of puzzled interest.

'And doesn't Miss Copley read the papers?' she inquired mildly.

'Evidently she does not,' Sybert rejoined with a laugh as he made his
adieus and withdrew.

                         ---------------------

Half an hour later, Marcia Copley, having made the rounds of the room,
again found herself, as tea was being served, in the neighbourhood of
her new acquaintance. She dropped down on the divan beside her with a
slight feeling of relief at being for the moment out of the current of
chatter. Her companion was a vivacious little woman approaching middle
age; and though she spoke perfect English, she pronounced her words
with a precision which suggested a foreign birth. Her conversation was
diverting; it gave evidence of a vast amount of worldly wisdom as well
as a wide acquaintance with other people's affairs. And her range of
subjects was wide. She flitted lightly from an artistic estimate of
some intaglios of the Augustan age, that had just been dug up outside
the Porta Pia, to a comparison of French and Italian dressmakers and a
prophecy as to which cardinal would be the next pope.

A portfolio of sketches lay on a little stand beside them, and she
presently drew them toward her, with the remark, 'We will see how our
young man has been amusing himself lately!'

There were a half-dozen or so of wash-drawings, and one or two outline
sketches of figures in red chalk. None of them was at all finished, but
the hasty blocking in showed considerable vigour, and the subjects were
at least original. There was no Castle of St. Angelo with a boatman in
the foreground, and no Temple of Vesta set off by a line of scarlet
seminarists. One of the chalk drawings was of an old chestnut woman
crouched over her charcoal fire; another was of the _octroi_ officer
under the tall arch of the San Giovanni gate, prodding the contents of
a donkey-cart with his steel rod. There were corners of wall shaded by
cypresses, bits of architectural adornment, a quick sketch of the
lichen-covered elephant's head spouting water at Villa Madama. They
all, slight as they were, possessed a certain distinction, and
suggested a very real impression of Roman atmosphere. Marcia examined
them with interest.

'They are extremely good,' she said as she laid the last one down.

'Yes,' her companion agreed; 'they are so good that they ought to be
better--but they never will be.'

'How do you mean?'

'I know Paul Dessart well enough to know that he will never paint a
picture. He has talent, and he's clever, but he's at everybody's
service. The workers have no time to be polite. However,' she finished,
'it is not for you and me to quarrel with him. If he set to work in
earnest he would stop giving teas, and that would be a pity, would it
not?'

'Indeed it would!' she agreed. 'How pretty the studio looks this
afternoon! I have seen it only by daylight before, and, like all the
rest of us, it improves by candle-light.' Her eyes wandered about the
big room, with its furnishings of threadbare tapestry and antique
carved chairs. The heavy curtains had been partly drawn over the
windows, making a pleasant twilight within. A subtle odour of linseed
oil and cigarette smoke, mingled with the fresh scent of violets,
pervaded the air.

Paul Dessart, with the _Prix de Rome_ man and a young English sculptor
of rising fame, presently joined them; and the talk drifted into Roman
politics--a subject concerning which, the artists declared with one
accord, they knew nothing and cared less.

'Oh, I used to get excited over their squabbles,' said the Englishman;
'but I soon saw that I should have to choose between that and
sculpture; I hadn't time for both.'

'I don't even know who's premier,' put in Dessart.

'A disgraceful lack of interest!' maintained the American girl. 'I have
only been in Rome two months, and I am an authority on the Triple
Alliance and the Abyssinian war; I know what Cavour wanted to do, and
what Crispi has done.'

'That's not fair, Miss Copley,' Dessart objected. 'You've been going to
functions at the Embassy, and one can absorb politics there through
one's skin. But I warn you, it isn't a safe subject to get interested
in; it becomes a disease, like the opium habit.'

'He's not so far from the truth,' agreed the sculptor. 'I was talking
to a fellow this afternoon, named Sybert, who--perhaps you know him,
Miss Copley?'

'Yes, I know him. What about him?'

'Oh--er--nothing, in that case.'

'Pray slander Mr. Sybert if you wish--I'll promise not to tell. He's
one of my uncle's friends, not one of mine.'

'Oh, I wasn't going to slander him,' the young man expostulated a
trifle sheepishly. 'The only thing I have against Sybert is the fact
that my conversation bores him.'

Marcia laughed with a certain sense of fellow-feeling.

'Say anything you please,' she repeated cordially. 'My conversation
bores him too.'

'Well, what I was going to say is that he has had about all the Roman
politics that are good for him. If he doesn't look out, he'll be
getting in too deep.'

'Too deep?' she queried.

It was Dessart who pursued the subject with just a touch of malice.
Laurence Sybert, apparently, was not so popular a person as a diplomat
should be.

'He's lived in Rome a good many years, and people are beginning to
wonder what he's up to. The Embassy does very well for a blind, for he
doesn't take any more interest in it than he does in whether or not
Tammany runs New York. All that Sybert knows anything about or cares
anything about is Italian politics, and there are some who think that
he knows a good sight more about them than he ought. He's in with the
Church party, in with the Government--first friends with the Right, and
then with the Left.'

'Monsieur Sybert is what you call an eclectic,' suggested Benoit. 'He
chooses the best of each.'

'I'm not so sure of that,' Dessart hinted darkly. 'He's interested in
other factions besides the Vatican and the Quirinal. There are one or
two pretty anarchistic societies in Rome, and I've heard it
whispered----'

'You don't mean----' she asked, with wide-open eyes.

The woman who wrote shook her head, with a laugh. 'I suspect that Mr.
Sybert's long residence in Rome might be reduced to a simpler formula
than that. It was a very wise person who first said, "_Cherchez la
femme_."'

'Oh, really?' said Marcia, with a new note of interest. Laurence Sybert
was not a man whom she had ever credited with having emotions, and the
suggestion came as a surprise.

'Rumour says that he still takes a very strong interest in the pretty
little Contessa Torrenieri. All I know is that nine or ten years ago,
when she was Margarita Carretti, he was openly among her admirers; but
she naturally preferred a count--or at least her parents did, which in
Italy amounts to the same.'

The girl's eyes opened still wider; the Contessa Torrenieri was also a
frequent guest at the palazzo. But Dessart received the suggestion with
a very sceptical smile.

'And you think that he is only waiting until, in the ripeness of time,
old Count Torrenieri goes the way of all counts? I know you are the
authority on gossip, madame, but, nevertheless, I doubt very much if
that is Laurence Sybert's trouble.'

'You don't really mean that he is an anarchist?' Marcia demanded.

'I give him up, Miss Copley.' The young man shrugged his shoulders and
spread out his hands in a gesture purely Italian.

'Are you talking politics?' asked Mrs. Copley as she joined the group
in company with Mr. and Mrs. Melville.

'Always politics,' laughed her niece--'or is it Mr. Sybert now?'

'They're practically interchangeable,' said Dessart.

'And did I hear you calling him an anarchist, Miss Marcia?' Melville
demanded.

She repudiated the charge with a laugh. 'I'm afraid Mr. Dessart's the
guilty one.'

'Here, here! that will never do! Sybert's a special friend of mine. I
can't allow you to be accusing him of anything like that.'

'A little applied anarchy wouldn't be out of place,' the young man
returned. 'I feel tempted to use some dynamite myself when I see the
way this precious government is scattering statues of Victor Emmanuel
broadcast through the land.'

'If you are going to get back into politics,' said Mrs. Copley, rising,
'I fear we must leave. I know from experience that it is a long
subject.'

The two turned away, escorted to the carriage by Dessart and the
Frenchman, while the rest of the group resettled themselves in the
empty places. The woman who wrote listened a moment to the badinage and
laughter which floated back through the open door; then, 'Mr. Dessart's
heiress is very attractive,' she suggested.

'Why Mr. Dessart's?' Melville inquired.

'Perhaps I was a little premature,' she conceded--'though, I venture to
prophesy, not incorrect.'

'My dear lady,' said Mrs. Melville impressively, 'you do not know Mrs.
Copley. Her niece is more likely to marry an Italian prince than a
nameless young artist.'

'She's no more likely to marry an Italian prince than she is a South
African chief,' her husband affirmed. 'Miss Marcia is a young woman who
will marry whom she pleases--though,' he added upon reflection, 'I am
not at all sure it will be Paul Dessart.'

'She might do worse,' said his wife. 'Paul is a nice boy.'

'Ah--and she might do better. I'll tell you exactly the man,' he added,
in a burst of enthusiasm, 'and that is Laurence Sybert.'

The suggestion was met by an amused smile from the ladies and a shrug
from the sculptor.

'My dear James,' said Mrs. Melville, 'you may be a very good business
man, but you are no match-maker. That is a matter you would best leave
to the women. As for your Laurence Sybert, he hasn't the ghost of a
chance--and he doesn't want it.'

'I'm doubting he has other fish to fry just now,' threw out the
sculptor.

'Sybert's all right,' said Melville emphatically.

The woman who wrote laughed as she rose. 'It will be an interesting
matter to watch,' she announced; 'but you may mark my words that our
host is the man.'




                               CHAPTER II


A CARRIAGE rumbled into the stone-paved courtyard of the Palazzo
Rosicorelli a good twenty minutes before six o'clock the next evening,
and the Copleys descended and climbed the stairs, at peace with Villa
Vivalanti and its thirty miles. Though it was still light out of doors,
inside the palace, with its deep-embrasured windows and heavy curtains,
it was already quite dark.  As they entered the long salon the only
light in the room came from a seven-branch candlestick on the
tea-table, which threw its reflection upon Gerald's white sailor-suit
and little bare knees as he sat back solemnly in a carved Savonarola
chair.  At the sound of their arrival he wriggled down quickly and
precipitated himself against Mrs. Copley.

'Oh, mamma! Sybert came to tea, an' I made it; an' he said it was lots
better van Marcia's tea, an' he dwank seven cups, an' I dwank four.'

A chorus of laughter greeted this revelation, and a lazy voice called
from the depths of an easy chair, 'Oh, I say, Gerald, you mustn't tell
such shocking tales, or your mother will never leave me alone with the
tea-things again.' And the owner of the voice pulled himself together
and walked across the room ta shake hands with the new-comers.

Laurence Sybert, as he advanced toward his hostess, threw a long thin
shadow against the wall. He had a spare, dark, clean-shaven face with
deep-set, sullen eyes; he was a delightfully perfected type of the
cosmopolitan; it would have taken a second, or very possibly a third,
glance to determine his nationality. But if the expression of his face
were Italian, Oriental, anything you please, his build was undoubtedly
Anglo-Saxon. Further, a certain wiriness beneath his movements
proclaimed him, to any one familiar with the loose-hung riders of the
plains, unmistakably American.

'Your son slanders me, Mrs. Copley,' he said as he held out his hand;
'I didn't drink but six, upon my honour.'

'Hello, Sybert! Anything happened in Rome to-day? What's the news on
the Rialto?' was Mr. Copley's greeting.

Marcia regarded him with a laugh as she drew off her gloves and lighted
the spirit-lamp.

'We've been away since nine this morning, and here's Uncle Howard
thirsting for news already!  What he will do when we really get out of
the city, I can't imagine.'

'Oh, and so you've taken the villa, have you?'

Marcia nodded.

'And you should see it!  It looks like a papal palace. This is the
first time that Prince Vivalanti has ever consented to rent it to
strangers; it's his official seat.'

'Very condescending of him,' the young man laughed; 'and do you accept
his responsibilities along with the place?'

'From the fattore's account I should say that his responsibilities rest
but lightly on the Prince of Vivalanti.'

'Ah--that's true enough.'

'Do you know him?'

'Only by hearsay. I know the village; and a more desperate little place
it would be hard to find in all the Sabine hills. The people's love for
their prince is tempered by the need of a number of improvements which
he doesn't supply.'

'I dare say they are pretty poor,' she conceded; 'but they are
unbelievably picturesque! Every person there looks as if he had just
walked out of a water-colour sketch. Even Uncle Howard was pleased, and
he has lived here so long that he is losing his enthusiasms.'

'It is a pretty decent sort of a place,' Copley agreed, 'though I have
a sneaking suspicion that we may find it rather far. But the rest of
the family liked it, and my aim in life----'

'Nonsense, Uncle Howard! you know you were crazy over it yourself. You
signed the lease without a protest. Didn't he, Aunt Katherine?'

'I signed the lease, my dear Marcia, at the point of the pistol.'

'The point of the pistol?'

'You threatened, if we got a mile--an inch, I believe you said--nearer
Rome, you would give a party every day; and if that isn't the point of
a pistol to a poor, worn-out man like me, I don't know what is.'

'It would certainly seem like it,' Sybert agreed. And turning to
Marcia, he added, 'I am afraid that you rule with a very despotic hand,
Miss Marcia.'

Marcia's eyebrows went up a barely perceptible trifle, but she laughed
and returned: 'No, indeed, Mr. Sybert; you are mistaken there. It is
not I, but Gerald, who plays the part of despot in the Copley
household.'

At this point, Granton, Mrs. Copley's English maid, appeared in the
doorway. 'Marietta is waiting to give Master Gerald his supper,' she
announced.

Gerald fled to his mother and raised a cry of protest.

'Mamma, please let me stay up to dinner wif you to-night.'

For a moment Mrs. Copley looked as if she might consent, but catching
sight of Granton's relentless face, she returned: 'No, my dear, you
have had enough festivity for one evening. You must have your tea and
go to bed like a good little boy.'

Gerald abandoned his mother and entrenched himself behind Sybert.
''Cause Sybert's here, an' I like Sybert,' he wailed desperately.

But Granton stormed even this fortress. 'Come, Master Gerald; your
supper's getting cold,' and she laid a firm hand on his shoulder and
marched him away.

'There's the real despot,' laughed Copley. 'I tremble before Granton
myself.'

Pietro appeared with a plate of toasted muffins and the evening mail.
Mr. Copley settled himself in a wicker chair, with a pile of letters on
the arm at his right; and, as he ran his eyes over them one by one, he
tore them in pieces and formed a new pile at his left. They were
begging letters for the most part. He received a great many, and this
was his usual method of answering them: not that he was an ungenerous
man; it was merely a matter of principle with him not to be generous in
this particular way.

As he sat disposing of envelope after envelope with vigorous hands,
Copley's appearance suggested a series of somewhat puzzling contrasts:
seriousness and humour; sensitiveness and force--an active impulse to
forge ahead and accomplish things, a counter-impulse to shrug his
shoulders and wonder why. He was a puzzle to most of his friends; at
times even one to his wife; but she had accepted his eccentricities
along with his millions, and though she did not always understand
either his motives of his actions, she made no complaint. To most men a
fortune is a blessing. To Copley it was rather in the nature of a
curse. He might have amounted to almost anything had he had to work for
it; but for the one field of activity which a fortune in America seems
to entail upon its owner--that of entering the arena and doubling and
tripling it--he was singularly unfitted both by temperament and
inclination. In this he differed from his elder brother. And there was
one other point in which the two were at variance. Though their father
had been in the eyes of the law a just and upright man, still, in the
battle of competition, many had fallen that he might stand, and the
younger son had grown up with the knowledge that from a humanitarian
standpoint the money was not irreproachable. He had the feeling--which
his brother characterized as absurd--that with his share of the fortune
he would like, in a measure, to make it up to mankind.

Howard Copley's first move in the game of benefiting humanity had been,
not very originally, an attempt at solving the negro problem; but the
negroes were ever a leisurely race, and Copley was a man impatient for
results. He finally abandoned them to the course of evolution, and
engaged in a spasmodic orgy of East Side politics. Becoming disgusted,
and failing of an election, he looked aimlessly about for a further
object in life. It was at this point that Mrs. Copley breathlessly
suggested a year in Paris for the sake of Gerald's French; the child
was only four, but one could not, as she justly pointed out, begin the
study of the languages too early. Her husband apathetically consenting,
they embarked for Paris by the roundabout route of the Mediterranean,
landed in Naples, and there they stayed. He had found a fascinating
occupation ready to his hand--that of helping on the work of good
government in this still turbulent portion of United Italy. After a
year the family drifted to Rome, and settled themselves in the _piano
nobile_ of the Palazzo Rosicorelli with something of an air of
permanence. Copley was at last thoroughly contented; he had no racial
prejudices, and Rome was as fair a field of reform as New York--and
infinitely more diverting. If the Italians did not always understand
his motives, still they accepted his services with a fair show of
gratitude.

As for Mrs. Copley, she had by no means intended their sojourn to be an
emigration, but she reflected that her husband had to be amused in some
way, and that reforming Italian posterity was perhaps an harmless a way
as he could have devised. She settled herself very contentedly to the
enjoyment of the somewhat shifting foreign society of the capital, with
only an occasional plaintive reference to her friends in New York and
to Gerald's French.

Marcia, leaning back in her chair, watched her uncle dispose of his
correspondence with a visible air of amusement. He had a thin nervous
face traced with fine lines, a sharply cut jaw, and a mouth which
twitched easily into a smile. To-night, however, as he ripped open
envelope after envelope, he frowned oftener than he smiled; and
presently, as he unfolded one letter, he suppressed a quick exclamation
of anger.

'Read that,' he said shortly, tossing it to the other man.

Sybert perused it with no visible change of expression, and leaning
over, he dropped it into the open grate.

Marcia laughed outright. 'Your mail doesn't seem to afford you much
satisfaction, Uncle Howard.'

'A large share of it's anonymous, and not all of it's polite.'

'That is what you must expect if you will hound those poor old beggars
to death.'

The two men shot each other a look of rather grim amusement. The letter
in question had nothing to do with beggars, but Mr. Copley had no
intention of discussing its contents with his niece.

'I find that the usual reward of virtue in this world is an anonymous
letter,' he remarked, shrugging the matter from his mind and settling
himself comfortably to his tea.

The guest refused the cup proffered him.

'I haven't the courage,' he declared, 'after Gerald's revelations.'

'By the way, Sybert,' said Copley, 'I have been hearing some bad
stories about you to-day. My niece doesn't like to have me associate
with you.'

Marcia looked at her uncle helplessly; when he once commenced teasing
there was no telling where he would stop.

'I am sorry,' said Sybert humbly. 'What is the trouble?'

'She has found out that you are an anarchist.'

Both men laughed, and Marcia flushed slightly.

'Please, Miss Marcia,' Sybert begged, 'give me time to get out of the
country before you expose me to the police.'

'There's no cause for fear,' she returned. 'I didn't believe the story
when I heard it, for I knew that you haven't energy enough to run away
from a bomb, much less throw one. That's why it surprised me that other
people should believe it.'

'But most people have a better opinion of me than you have,' he
expostulated.

'No, indeed, Mr. Sybert; I have a better opinion of you than most
people. I really consider you harmless.'

The young man laughed and bowed his thanks, while he turned his
attention to Mrs. Copley.

'I hope that Villa Vivalanti will prove more successful than the one in
Naples.'

Mrs. Copley looked at him reproachfully. 'That horrible man! I never
think of him without wishing we were safely back in America.'

'Then please don't think of him,' her husband returned. 'He is where he
won't trouble you any more.'

'What man?' asked Marcia, emerging from a dignified silence.

'Is it possible Miss Marcia has never heard of the tattooed man?'
Sybert inquired gravely.

'The tattooed man! What _are_ you talking about?'

'It has a somewhat theatrical ring,' Mr. Copley admitted.

'It is nothing to make light of,' said his wife. 'It's a wonder to me
that we escaped with our lives. Three years ago, while we were in
Naples,' she added to her niece, 'your uncle, with his usual
recklessness, got mixed up with one of the secret societies. Our villa
was out toward Posilipo, and one afternoon I was driving home at about
dusk--I had been shopping in the city--and just as we reached a lonely
place in the road, between two high walls----'

Mr. Copley broke in: 'A masked man armed to the teeth sprang up in the
path, with a horrible oath.'

'Not really!' Marcia cried, leaning forward delightedly. 'Aunt
Katherine, _did_ a masked man----'

'He wasn't masked, but I wish he had been; he would have looked less
ferocious. He came straight to the side of the carriage, and taking off
his hat with a very polite bow, he said that unless we left Naples in
three days your uncle's life would no longer be safe. His shirt was
open at the throat, and there was a crucifix tattooed upside down on
his breast. You can imagine what a desperate character he must have
been--here in Italy of all places, where the people are so religious.'

The two men laughed at the climax.

'What did you do?' Marcia asked.

'I was too shocked to speak, and Gerald, poor child, screamed all the
way home.'

'And did you leave the city?'

'As it happened, we were leaving anyway,' her uncle put in; 'but we
postponed our departure long enough for me to hunt the fellow down and
put him in jail.'

'You may be thankful that they had the decency to warn you,' Sybert
remarked.

'It's like a dime novel!' Marcia sighed. 'To be mixed up with murders
and warnings and tattooed men and secret societies----Why didn't you
send for me, Uncle Howard?'

'Well, you see, I didn't know that you had grown up into such a
charming person--though I am not sure that it would have made any
difference. I had all that I could do to take care of one woman.'

'That's the way,' she complained. 'Just because one's a girl one is
always shut up in the house while there's anything exciting going on.'

'If you are so fond of bloodshed,' Sybert suggested, 'you may possibly
have a chance of seeing some this spring.'

'This spring? Is the Camorra making trouble again?'

'Oh, no; not the Camorra. But unless all signs fail, there is a
prospect of some fairly exciting riots.'

'Really? Here in Rome?'

'Well, no; probably not in Rome--there are too many soldiers.  More
likely in the Neapolitan provinces. I am sorry,' he added, 'since you
seem to find them so entertaining, that we can't promise you a riot on
your own door-step; but I dare say, when it comes to the point, you'll
find Naples near enough.'

'I give you fair warning, Uncle Howard,' she said, 'if there are any
riots in Naples, I'm going down to see them. What is the trouble? What
are they rioting about?'

'If there are any riots,' said her uncle, 'you, my dear young lady,
will amuse yourself at Villa Vivalanti until they are over,' and he
abruptly changed the subject.

The talk drifted back to the villa again. Mrs. Copley afforded their
guest a more detailed description.

'Nineteen bedrooms aside from the servants' quarters, and room in the
stable for thirty horses!' she finished.

'The princes of Vivalanti must have kept up an establishment in their
pre-Riviera days.'

'Mustn't they?' agreed Marcia cordially. The new villa was proving an
unexpectedly soothing topic. 'We'll keep up an establishment too,' she
added. 'We're going to give a house-party when the Roystons come down
from Paris, and--I know what we'll do! We'll give a ball for my
birthday--won't we, Uncle Howard? And have everybody out from Rome, and
the ilex grove all lighted with coloured lamps!'

'Not if I have anything to say about it,' said Mr. Copley.

'But you won't have,' said Marcia.

'The only reason that I consented to take this villa was that I thought
it was far enough away to escape parties for a time. You said----'

'I said if you got nearer Rome we'd give a party _every_ day, while as
it is I'm only planning one party for all the three months.'

'Sybert and I won't come to it,' he grumbled.

'Perhaps you and Mr. Sybert won't be invited.'

'I don't know where you'd find two such charming men,' said Mrs. Copley.

'Rome's full of them,' returned Marcia imperturbably.

'Who are the Roystons, Miss Marcia?' Sybert inquired.

'They are the friends I came over with last fall. You know Mr. Dessart?'

'The artist? Yes, I know him.'

'Well, Mrs. Royston is his aunt, and she has two daughters who----'

'Are his cousins,' suggested Mr. Copley.

'Yes; to be sure, and very charming girls. They spend a great deal of
time over here--at least Mrs. Royston and Eleanor do. Margaret has been
in college.'

'And Mr. Royston,' asked Copley, 'stays in America and attends to his
business?'

'Yes; Mrs. Royston and Eleanor go over quite often to keep him from
getting lonely.'

'Very generous of them,' Sybert laughed.

'They've spent winters in Cairo and Vienna and Paris and a lot of
different places,' pursued Marcia. 'Eleanor,' she added ruminatingly,
'has been out nine seasons, and she has had a good deal of--experience.'

'Dear, dear!' said her uncle; 'and you are proposing to expose all
Rome----'

'She's very attractive,' said Marcia, and then she glanced at Sybert
and laughed. 'If she should happen to take a fancy to you, Mr.
Sybert----'

The young man rose to his feet and looked about for his hat.
'Goodness!' he murmured, 'what would she do?'

'There's no telling.' Marcia regarded him with a speculative light in
her eyes.

'A young woman who has been practising for nine seasons certainly ought
to have her hand in,' Copley agreed. 'Perhaps, after all, Sybert, it is
best we should not meet her.'

Sybert found his hat and paused for a moment.

'You can't frighten me that way, Miss Marcia,' he said, with a shake of
his head. 'I have been out thirteen seasons myself.'




                              CHAPTER III


'MAY I come in for tea, Cousin Marcia?' Gerald inquired, with a note of
anxiety in his voice, as they climbed the stone staircase of the
Palazzo Rosicorelli. They had been spending the afternoon in the
Borghese gardens, and the boy's very damp sailor-suit bore witness to
the fact that he had been indulging in the forbidden pleasure of
catching goldfish in the fountain.

'Indeed you may not,' she returned emphatically. 'You may go with
Marietta and have some dry clothes put on before your mother sees you.'

Gerald, realizing the wisdom of this course, allowed himself to be
quietly spirited off the back way, in spite of the fact that he heard
the alluring sound of Sybert's voice in the direction of the salon.
Marcia went on in without waiting to take off her hat, and she met the
Melvilles in the ante-room, on the point of leaving.

'Good afternoon. Why do you go so early?' she asked.

'Oh, we are coming back later; we are just going home to dress. Your
uncle is giving a dinner to-night--a very formal affair.'

'Is that so?' she laughed. 'I have not been invited.'

'You will be; don't feel hurt. It's a general invitation issued to all
comers.'

Marcia found no one within but her aunt and uncle and Mr. Sybert.

'What is this I hear about your giving a dinner to-night, Aunt
Katherine?' she asked as she settled herself in a wicker chair and
stretched out her hand for a cup of tea.

'You must ask your uncle. I have nothing to do with it,' Mrs. Copley
disclaimed. 'He invited the guests, and he must provide the menu.'

'What is it, Uncle Howard?'

'Merely a little farewell dinner. I thought we ought to put on a bright
face our last night, you know.'

'One would think you were going to be led to execution at dawn.'

'We will hope it's nothing worse than exile,' said Sybert.

'Who are your guests, and when were they invited?'

'My guests are the people who dropped in late to tea; I did not think
of it early enough to make the invitation very general. The list, I
believe, includes the Melvilles, Signora Androit and the Contessa
Torrenieri, Sidney Carthrope the sculptor, and a certain young
Frenchman, a most alluring youth, who called with him, but whose name
for the moment escapes me.'

'Adolphe Benoit,' said Sybert.

'The _Prix de Rome_?' asked Marcia. 'Oh, I know him! I met him a few
weeks ago at a tea; he's very entertaining. I suppose,' she added,
considering the list, 'that he will fall to my share?'

'Unless you prefer Mr. Sybert.'

'An embarrassing predicament, Miss Marcia,' Sybert laughed. 'If it will
facilitate matters we can draw lots.'

'Not at all,' said Marcia graciously, 'I know the Contessa would rather
have you; and as she is the guest I will let her choose. I hope your
dinner will be a success,' she added to her uncle, 'but I can't help
feeling that you show a touching faith in the cook.'

'Thank you, my dear; I am of an optimistic turn of mind, and Francois
has never failed me yet.--How did the Borghese gallery go?'

'Very well. I met Mr. Dessart there--and I met the King outside.'

'Ah, I hope His Majesty was enjoying good health?'

'He seemed to be. I didn't stop to speak to him, but there was a boy in
a group of seminarists near us who called out, "Viva il papa," just as
he passed.'

'And what happened?' Sybert inquired. 'Did the King's guard behead him
on the spot, or did they only send him to the galleys for life?'

'The King's guard fortunately had eyes only for the King, and the old
priest gathered his flock together and scuttled off down one of the
side paths, as frightened as a hen who sees a hawk.'

'And with good reason--but wait till the lads grow up, and they'll do
something besides shout and run.'

There was an undertone in Sybert's voice different from his usual
listless drawl. Marcia glanced up at him quickly and Dessart's
insinuations flashed through her mind.

'Do you mean you would rather have Leo XIII king instead of Humbert?'
she asked.

'Heavens, no! No one wants the temporal power back--not even the
Catholics themselves.'

'I should think that when the Italians have gone through so much to get
their king, they might be satisfied with him. They ought to have more
patience, and not expect the country to be rich in a minute. Everything
can't be done all at once; and as for blaming the government because
the African war didn't turn out well--why, no one could foresee the
result. It was a mistake instead of a crime.'

Sybert was watching her lazily, with an amused smile about his lips.
'Will you pardon me, Miss Marcia, if I ask if those are your own
conclusions, or the opinions of our young friend the American artist?'

'He does not plot against the King, at any rate!' she retorted.

'Please, Miss Marcia,' he begged, 'don't think so badly of me as that.
Really, I'm not an anarchist. I don't want to blow His Majesty up.'

'Go home and dress, Sybert,' Copley murmured, taking him by the arm. 'I
have to go and interview the cook, and I don't dare leave you and my
niece together. There's no telling what would happen.'

'She's a suspicious young woman,' Sybert complained. 'Can't you teach
her to take your friends on trust?'

'For the matter of that, she doesn't even take her uncle on trust.'

'And no wonder!' said Marcia. 'I forgot to tell you my other adventure,
just as the carriage turned into the Corso we got jammed in close to
the curb and had to stop. I looked up and saw a man standing on the
side-walk, glaring at me over the top of a newspaper--simply
glaring--and suddenly he jumped to the side of the carriage and thrust
the paper in my hands. He said something in Italian, but too fast for
me to catch, and before I could move, Marietta had snatched it up and
dashed it back in his face. The paper was named the _Cry of the
People_; I just caught one word in it, and that was--' she paused
dramatically--'Copley! Now, Uncle Howard,' she finished, 'do you think
you ought to be trusted? When it gets to the point that the people in
the street----'

She stopped suddenly. She had caught a quick glance between her uncle
and Sybert. 'What is it?' she asked. 'Do you know what it means?'

'It means damned impudence!' said her uncle. 'I'll have that editor
arrested if he doesn't keep still,' and the two men stood eyeing each
other a minute in silence. Then Copley gave a short laugh. 'Oh, well,'
he said, 'I don't believe the _Grido del Popolo_ can destroy my
character. Nobody reads it.' He looked at his watch. 'You'd better go
and dress, Marcia. My party begins promptly at eight.'

'You needn't use any such clumsy method as that of getting rid of me,'
she laughed. 'I'm not going to stay where I'm not wanted. All I have to
say,' she called back from the doorway, 'is that you'd better stop
badgering those poor old beggars, or you'll be getting a warning to
leave Rome as well as Naples.'

                         ---------------------

Marcia rang for Granton.

'Have you time to fix my hair now?' she inquired as the maid appeared,
'or does Mrs. Copley need you?'

'Mrs. Copley hasn't begun to dress yet; she is watching Master Gerald
eat his supper.'

'Oh, very well, then, there is time enough; I'll get through before she
is ready for you. Do my hair sort of Frenchy,' she commanded as she sat
down before the mirror. 'What dress do you think I'd better wear?' she
continued presently. 'That white one I wore last week, or the new green
one that came from Paris yesterday?'

'I should think the white one, Miss Marcia, and save the new one for
some party.'

'It would be more sensible,' Marcia agreed; 'but,' she added with a
laugh, 'I think I'll wear the new one.'

Granton got it out with an unsmiling face which was meant to convey the
fact that she could not countenance this American prodigality. She had
lived ten years with an elderly English duchess, and had thought that
she knew the ways of the aristocracy.

The gown was a filmy green mousseline touched with rose velvet and
yellow lace. Marcia put it on and surveyed herself critically. 'What do
you think, Granton?' she asked.

'It's very becoming, Miss Marcia,' Granton returned primly.

'Yes,' Marcia sighed--'and very tight!' She caught up her fan and
turned toward the door. 'Don't be hurt because I didn't take your
advice,' she called back over her shoulder. 'I never take anybody's,
Granton.'

She found her uncle alone in the salon, pacing the floor in a restless
fashion, with two frowning lines between his brows. He paused in his
walk as she appeared, and his frown gave place, readily enough, to a
smile.

'You look very well to-night,' he remarked approvingly. 'You--er--have
a new gown, haven't you?'

'Oh, yes, Uncle Howard,' she laughed. 'It's all the gown. Send your
compliments to my dressmaker, 45 Avenue de l'Opera. I thought I would
wear it in honour of Mr. Sybert; it's so seldom we have him with us.'

Mr. Copley received this statement with something like a grunt.

'There! Uncle Howard, I didn't mean to hurt your feelings. Mr. Sybert
is the nicest man that ever lived. And what I particularly like about
him, is the fact that he is so genial and expansive and thoughtful for
others--always trying to put people at their ease.'

Mr. Copley refused to smile. 'I am sorry, Marcia, that you don't like
Sybert,' he said quietly. 'It's because you don't understand him.'

'I dare say; and I suppose he doesn't like me, for the same reason.'

'He is a splendid fellow; I've never known a better one--and a man can
judge.'

Marcia laughed. 'Uncle Howard, do you know what you remind me of? An
Italian father who is arranging a marriage for his daughter, and having
chosen the man, is recommending him for her approval.'

'Oh, no; I don't go to the length of asking you to fall in love with
him--though you might do worse--but I should be pleased if you would
treat him--er----'

'Respectfully, as I would my father.'

'More respectfully than you do your uncle, at any rate. He may not be
exactly what you'd call a lady's man----'

'A lady's man! Uncle Howard, you make me furious when you talk like
that; as if I only liked men with dimples in their chins, who dance
well and get ices for you! I'm sorry if I don't treat Mr. Sybert
seriously enough; but really I don't think he treats me seriously,
either. You think I don't know anything, just because I can't tell the
difference between the Left and the Right. I've only just come to Rome,
and I don't see how you can expect me to know about Italian politics.
You both of you laugh whenever I ask the simplest question.'

'But you ask such exceedingly simple questions, dear.'

'How can I help it when you give me such absurd answers?'

'I'm sorry. We'll try to do better in the future. I suppose we've both
of us been a little worried this spring, and you probe us on a tender
point.'

'But who ever heard of a man's being really worried over politics--that
is, unless he's running for something? They should be regarded as an
amusement to while away your leisure. You and Mr. Sybert are so funny,
Uncle Howard; you take your amusements so seriously.'

'"Politics" is a broad word, Marcia,' he returned, with a slight frown;
'and when it stands for oppression and injustice and starving peasants
it has to be taken seriously.'

'Is it really so bad, Uncle Howard?'

'Good heavens, Marcia! It's awful!'

She was startled at his tone, and glanced up at him quickly. He was
staring at the light, with a hard look in his eyes and his mouth drawn
into a straight line.

'I'm sorry, Uncle Howard; I didn't know. What can I do?'

'What can any of us do?' he asked bitterly.  'We can give one day, and
it's eaten up before night. And we can keep on giving, but what does it
amount to? The whole thing is rotten from the bottom.'

'Can't the people get work?'

'No; and when they can, their earnings are eaten up in taxes. The
people in the southern provinces are literally starving, I tell you;
and it's worse this year than usual, thanks to men like your father and
me.'

'What do you mean?'

For a moment he felt almost impelled to tell her the truth. Then, as he
glanced down at her, he stopped himself quickly. She looked so
delicate, so patrician, so aloof from everything that was sordid and
miserable; she could not help, and it was better that she should not
know.

'What do you mean?' she repeated. 'What has papa been doing?'

'Oh, nothing very criminal,' he returned. 'Only at a time like this one
feels as if one's money were a reproach. Italy's in a bad way just now;
the wheat crop failed last year, and that makes it inconvenient for
people who live on macaroni.'

'Do you mean the people really haven't anything to eat?'

'Not much.'

'How terrible, Uncle Howard! Won't the government do anything?'

'The government is doing what it can. There was a riot in Florence last
month, and they lowered the grain tax; King Humbert gave nine thousand
lire to feed the people of Pisa a couple of weeks ago. You can do the
same for some other city, if you want to play at being a princess.'

'I thought you believed in finding them work instead giving them money.'

'Oh, as a matter of principle, certainly. But you can't have 'em dying
on your door-step, you know.'

'And to think we're having a dinner to-night, when we're not the
slightest bit hungry!'

'I'm afraid our dinner wouldn't go far toward feeding the hungry in
Italy.'

'How does my dress look, my dear?' asked Mrs. Copley, appearing in the
doorway. 'I have been so bothered over it; she didn't fix the lace at
all as I told her. These Italian dressmakers are not to be depended
upon. I really should have run up to Paris for a few weeks this spring,
only you were so unwilling, Howard.'

Marcia looked at her aunt a moment with wide-open eyes. 'Heavens!' she
thought, 'do I usually talk this way? No wonder Mr. Sybert doesn't like
me!'  And then she laughed. 'I think it looks lovely, Aunt Katherine,
and I am sure it is very becoming.'

The arrival of guests precluded any further conversation on the subject
of Italian dressmakers. The Contessa Torrenieri was small and slender
and olive-coloured, with a cloud of black hair and dramatic eyes. She
had a pair of nervous little hands which were never still, and a
magnetic manner which brought the men to her side and created a
tendency among the women to say spiteful things. Marcia was no
exception to the rest of her sex, and her comments on the contessa's
doings were frequently not prompted by a spirit of charitableness.

To-night the contessa evidently had something on her mind. She barely
finished her salutations before transferring her attention to Marcia.
'Come, Signorina Copley, and sit beside me on the sofa; we harmonize so
well'--this with a glance from her own rose-coloured gown to Marcia's
rose trimmings.  'I missed you from tea this afternoon,' she added.  'I
trust you had a pleasant walk.'

'A pleasant walk?' Marcia questioned, off her guard.

'I passed you as I was driving in the Borghese. But you did not see me;
you were too occupied.' She shook her head, with a smile. 'It will not
do in Italy, my dear. An Italian girl would never walk alone with a
young man.'

'Fortunately I am not an Italian girl.'

'You are too strict, contessa,' Sybert, who was sitting near, put in
with a laugh. 'If Miss Copley chooses, there is no reason why she
should not walk in the gardens with a young man.'

'A girl of the lower classes perhaps, but not of Signorina Copley's
class. With her dowry, she will be marrying an Italian nobleman one of
these days.'

Marcia flushed with annoyance. 'I have not the slightest intention of
marrying an Italian nobleman,' she returned.

'One must marry some one,' said her companion.

Mr. Melville relieved the tension by inquiring, 'And who was the hero
of this episode, Miss Marcia? We have not heard his name.'

Marcia laughed good-humouredly. 'Your friend Mr. Dessart.' The
Melvilles exchanged glances. 'I met him in the gallery, and as the
carriage hadn't come and Gerald was playing in the fountain and
Marietta was flirting with a gendarme (Dear me! Aunt Katherine, I
didn't mean to say that), we strolled about until the carriage came.
I'm sure I had no intention of shocking the Italian nobility; it was
quite unpremeditated.'

'If the Italian nobility never stands a worse shock than that, it is
happier than most nobilities,' said her uncle. And the simultaneous
announcement of M. Benoit and dinner created a diversion.

It was a small party, and every one felt the absence of that
preliminary chill which a long list of guests invited two weeks
beforehand is likely to produce. They talked back and forth across the
table, and laughed and joked in the unpremeditated way that an
impromptu affair calls forth. Marcia glanced at her uncle once or twice
in half perplexity. He seemed so entirely the careless man of the
world, as he turned a laughing face to answer one of Mrs. Melville's
sallies, that she could scarcely believe he was the same man who had
spoken so seriously to her a few minutes before. She glanced across at
Sybert. He was smiling at some remark of the contessa's, to which he
retorted in Italian. 'I don't see how any sensible man can be
interested in the contessa!' was her inward comment as she transferred
her attention to the young Frenchman at her side.

Whenever the conversation showed a tendency to linger on politics, Mrs.
Copley adroitly redirected it, as she knew from experience that the
subject was too combustible by far for a dinner-party.

'Italy, Italy! These men talk nothing but Italy,' she complained to the
young Frenchman on her right. 'Does it not make you homesick for the
boulevards?'

'I suffered the nostalgie once,' he confessed, 'but Rome is a good
cure.'

Marcia shook her head in mock despair. 'And you, too, M. Benoit!
Patriotism is certainly dying out.'

'Not while you live,' said her uncle.

'Oh, I know I'm abnormally patriotic,' she admitted; 'but you're all so
sluggish in that respect, that you force it upon one.'

'There are other useful virtues besides patriotism,' Sybert suggested.

'Wait until you have spent a spring in the Sabine hills, Miss Copley,'
Melville put in, 'and you will be as bad as the rest of us.'

'Ah, mademoiselle,' Benoit added fervently, 'spring-time in the Sabine
hills will be compensation sufficient to most of us for not seeing
paradise.'

'I believe, with my uncle, it's a kind of Roman fever!' she cried. 'I
never expected to hear a Frenchman renounce his native land.'

'It is not that I renounce France,' the young man remonstrated. 'I lofe
France as much as ever, but I open my arms to Italy as well. To lofe
another land and peoples besides your own makes you, not littler, but,
as you say, wider--broader. We are--we are---- Ah, mademoiselle!' he
broke off, 'if you would let me talk in French I could say what I mean;
but how can one be eloquent in this halting tongue of yours?'

'_Coraggio_, Benoit! You are doing bravely,' Sybert laughed.

'We are,' the young man went on with a sudden inspiration, 'what you
call in English, citizens of the world. You, mademoiselle, are
American, La Signora Contessa is Italian, Mr. Carthrope is English, I
am French, but we are all citizens of the same world, and in whatever
land we find ourselves, there we recognize one another for brothers,
and are always at home; for it is still the world.'

The young man's eloquence was received with an appreciative laugh. 'And
how about paradise?' some one suggested.

'Ah, my friends, it is there that we will be strangers!' Benoit
returned tragically.

'Citizens of the world,' Sybert turned the stem of his wine glass
meditatively as he repeated the phrase. 'It seems to me, in spite of
Miss Marcia, that one can't do much better than that. If you're a
patriotic citizen of the world, I should think you'd done your duty by
mankind, and might reasonably expect to reap a reward in Benoit's
paradise.'

He laughed and raised his glass.  'Here's to the World, our fatherland!
May we all be loyal citizens!'

'I think,' said Mrs. Melville, 'since this is a farewell dinner and we
are pledging toasts, we should drink to Villa Vivalanti and a happy
spring in the Sabine hills.'

Copley bowed his thanks. 'If you will all visit the villa we will
pledge it in the good wine of Vivalanti.'

'And here's to the Vivalanti ghost!' said the young Frenchman.  'May it
lif long and prosper!'

'Italy's the place for such ghosts to prosper,' Copley returned.

'Here's to the poor people of Italy--may they have enough to eat!' said
Marcia.

Sybert glanced up in sudden surprise, but she did not look at him; she
was smiling across at her uncle.




                               CHAPTER IV


THE announcement that a _principe Americano_ was coming to live in
Villa Vivalanti occasioned no little excitement in the village. Wagons
with furnishings from Rome had been seen to pass on the road below the
town, and the contadini in the wayside vineyards had stopped their work
to stare, and had repeated to each other rumours of the fabulous wealth
this signor _principe_ was said to possess. The furniture they allowed
to pass without much controversy. But they shook their heads dubiously
when two wagons full of flowering trees and shrubs wound up the roadway
toward the villa. This foreigner must be a grasping person--as if there
were not trees enough already in the Sabine hills, that he must bring
out more from Rome!

The dissection of the character of Prince Vivalanti's new tenant
occupied so much of the people's time that the spring pruning of the
vineyards came near to being slighted. The fountainhead of all
knowledge on the subject was the landlord of the _Croce d'Oro_. He
himself had had the honour of entertaining their excellencies at
breakfast, on the occasion of their first visit to Castel Vivalanti,
and with unvarying eloquence he nightly recounted the story to an
interested group of loungers in the _trattoria_ kitchen: of how he had
made the omelet without garlic because princes have delicate stomachs
and cannot eat the food one would cook for ordinary men; of how they
had sat at that very table, and the young _signorina principessa_, who
was beautiful as the holy angels in paradise, had told him with her own
lips that it was the best omelet she had ever eaten; and of how they
had paid fifteen lire for their breakfast without so much as a word of
protest, and then of their own accord had given three lire more for
_mancia_]. Eighteen lire. _Corpo di Bacco!_ that was the kind of guests
he wished would drop in every day.

But when Domenico Paterno, the baker of Castel Vivalanti, heard the
story, he shrugged his shoulders and spread out his palms, and asserted
that a prince was a prince all over the world; and that the _Americano_
had allowed himself to be cheated from stupidity, not generosity. For
his part, he thought the devil was the same, whether he talked American
or Italian. But it was reported, on the other hand, that Bianca Rosini
had also talked with the _forestieri_ when she was washing clothes in
the stream. They had stopped their horses to watch the work, and the
signorina had smiled and asked if the water were not cold; for her
part, she was sure American nobles had kind hearts.

Domenico, however, was not to be convinced by any such counter-evidence
as this.  'Smiles are cheap,' he returned sceptically. 'Does any one
know of their giving money?'

No one did know of their giving money, but there were plenty of boys to
testify that they had run by the side of the carriage fully a kilometre
asking for soldi, and the signore had only shaken his head to pay them
for their trouble.

'_Si, si_, what did I tell you?' Domenico finished in triumph.
'American princes are like any others--perhaps a little more stupid,
but for the rest, exactly the same.'

There were no facts at hand to confute such logic.

And one night Domenico appeared at the _Croce d'Oro_ with a fresh piece
of news; his son, Tarquinio, who kept an osteria in Rome, had told the
whole story.

'His name is Copli--Signor Edoardo Copli--and it is because of
him'--Domenico scowled--'that I pay for my flour twice the usual price.
When the harvests failed last year, and he saw that wheat was going to
be scarce, he sent to America and he bought all the wheat in the land
and he put it in storehouses. He is holding it there now while the
price goes up--up--up. And when the poor people in Italy get very, very
hungry, and are ready to pay whatever he asks, then perhaps--very
charitably--he will agree to sell. _Gia_, that is the truth,' he
insisted darkly. 'Everybody knows it in Rome. Doubtless he thinks to
escape from his sin up here in the mountains--but he will see--it will
follow him wherever he goes. _Mache!_ It is the story of the Bad Prince
over again.'

Finally one morning--one Friday morning--some of the children of the
village who were in the habit of loitering on the highway in the hope
of picking up stray soldi, reported that the American's horses and
carriages had come out from Rome, and that the drivers had stopped at
the inn of _Sant' Agapito_ and ordered wine like gentlemen. It was
further rumoured that the _principe_ himself intended to follow in the
afternoon. The matter was discussed with considerable interest before
the usual noonday siesta.

'It is my opinion,' said Tommaso Ferri, the blacksmith, as he sat in
the baker's doorway, washing down alternate mouthfuls of bread and
onion with Vivalanti wine--'it is my opinion that the Signor Americano
must be a very reckless man to venture on so important a journey on
Friday--and particularly in Lent. It is well known that if a poor man
starts for market on Friday, he will break his eggs on the way; and
because a rich man has no eggs to break, is that any reason the _buon
Dio_ should overlook his sin? Things are more just in heaven than on
earth,' he added solemnly; 'and in my opinion, if the foreigner comes
to-day, he will not prosper in the villa.'

Domenico nodded approvingly.

'_Si, si_, Tommaso is right. The Americano has already tempted heaven
far enough in this matter of the wheat, and it will not be the part of
wisdom for him to add to the account. Apoplexies are as likely to fall
on princes as on bakers, and a dead prince is no different from any
other dead man--only that he goes to purgatory.'

It was evident, however, that the foreigner was in truth going to tempt
Fate; for in the afternoon two empty carriages came back from the villa
and turned toward Palestrina, obviously bound for the station. All the
_ragazzi_ of Castel Vivalanti waited on the road to see them pass and
beg for coppers; and it was just as Domenico had foretold: they never
received a single soldo.

The remarks about the _principe Americano_ were not complimentary in
Castel Vivalanti that night; but the little yellow-haired _principino_
was handled more gently. The black-haired little Italian boys told how
he had laughed when they turned somersaults by the side of the
carriage, and how he had cried when his father would not let him throw
soldi; and the general opinion seemed to be that if he died young, he
at least had a chance of paradise.




                               CHAPTER V


MEANWHILE, the unconscious subjects of Castel Vivalanti's 'apoplexies'
were gaily installing themselves in their new, old dwelling. The happy
hum of life had again invaded the house, and its walls once more echoed
to the ring of a child's laughter. They were very matter-of-fact
people--these Americans, and they took possession of the ancestral home
of the Vivalanti as if it were as much their right as a seaside cottage
at Newport. Upstairs Granton and Marietta were unpacking trunks and
hampers and laying Paris gowns in antique Roman clothes-chests; in the
villa kitchen Francois was rattling copper pots and kettles, and
anxiously trying to adapt his modern French ideas to a mediaeval Roman
stove; while from every room in succession sounded the patter of
Gerald's feet and his delighted squeals over each new discovery.

For the past two weeks Roman workmen and Castel Vivalanti
cleaning-women had been busily carrying out Mrs. Copley's orders. The
florid furniture and coloured chandeliers of the latter Vivalanti had
been banished to the attic (or what answers to an attic in a Roman
villa), while the faded damask of a former generation had been dusted
and restored. Tapestries covered the walls and hung over the balustrade
of the marble staircase. Dark rugs lay on the red tile floors; carved
chests and antique chairs and tables of coloured marble, supported by
gilded griffins, were scattered through the rooms. In the bedrooms the
heavy draperies had been superseded by curtains of an airier texture,
while wicker chairs and chintz-covered couches lent an un-Roman air of
comfort to the rooms.

In spite of his humorous grumbling about the trials of moving-day, Mr.
Copley found himself very comfortable as he lounged on the parapet
toward sunset, smoking a pre-prandial cigarette, and watching the
shadows as they fell over the Campagna. Gerald was already up to his
elbows in the fountain, and the ilex grove was echoing his happy
shrieks as he prattled in Italian to Marietta about a marvellous
two-tailed lizard he had caught in a cranny of the stones. Copley
smiled as he listened, for--Castel Vivalanti to the contrary--his
little boy was very near his heart.

Marcia in the house had been gaily superintending the unpacking, and
running back and forth between the rooms, as excited by her new
surroundings as Gerald himself.

'What time does Villa Vivalanti dine?' she inquired while on a flying
visit to her aunt's room.

'Eight o'clock when any of us are in town, and half-past seven other
nights.'

'I suppose it's half-past seven to-night, _alors!_ Shall I make a
_grande toilette_ in honour of the occasion?'

'Put on something warm, whatever else you do; I distrust this climate
after sundown.'

'You're such a distrustful person, Aunt Katherine! I can't understand
how one can have the heart to accuse this innocent old villa of
harbouring malaria.'

She returned to her own room and delightedly rummaged out a dinner-gown
from the ancient wardrobe, with a little laugh at the thought of the
many different styles it had held in its day. Perhaps some other girl
had once occupied this room; very likely a young Princess Vivalanti,
two hundred years before, had hung silk-embroidered gowns in this very
wardrobe. It was a big, rather bare, delightfully Italian apartment
with tall windows having solid barred shutters overlooking the terrace.
The view from the windows revealed a broad expanse of Campagna and
hills. Marcia dressed with her eyes on the landscape, and then stood a
long time gazing up at the broken ridges of the Sabines, glowing softly
in the afternoon light. Picturesque little mountain hamlets of battered
grey stone were visible here and there clinging to the heights; and in
the distance the walls and towers of a half-ruined monastery stood out
clear against the sky. She drew a deep breath of pleasure. To be an
artist, and to appreciate and reproduce this beauty, suddenly struck
her as an ideal life. She smiled at herself as she recalled something
she had said to Paul Dessart in the gallery the day before; she had
advised him--an artist--to exchange Italy for Pittsburg!

Mr. Copley, who was strolling on the terrace, glanced up, and catching
sight of his niece, paused beneath her balcony while he quoted:--

         '"But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
           It is the east, and Juliet is the sun."'

Marcia brought her eyes from the distant landscape to a contemplation
of her uncle; and then she stepped through the glass doors, and leaned
over the balcony railing with a little laugh.

'You make a pretty poor Romeo, Uncle Howard,' she called down. 'I'm
afraid the real one never wore a dinner-jacket nor smoked a cigarette.'

Mr. Copley spread out his hands in protest.

'For the matter of that, I doubt if Juliet ever wore a gown from--where
was it--42, Avenue de l'Opera? How does the new house go?' he asked.

'Beautifully. I feel like a princess on a balcony waiting for the
hunters to come back from the chase.'

'I can't get over the idea that I'm a usurper myself, and that the
rightful lord is languishing in a donjon somewhere in the cellar. Come
down and talk to me. I'm getting lonely so far from the world.'

Marcia disappeared from the balcony and reappeared three minutes later
on the loggia. She paused on the top step and slowly turned around in
order to take in the whole affect. The loggia, in its rehabilitation,
made an excellent lounging-place for a lazy summer morning. It was
furnished with comfortably deep Oriental rush chairs, a crimson rug and
awnings, and, at either side of the steps, white azaleas growing in
marble cinerary urns.

'Isn't this the most fun you ever had, Uncle Howard?' she inquired as
she brought her eyes back to Mr. Copley waiting on the terrace below.
'We'll have coffee served out here in the morning, and then when it
gets sunny in the afternoon we'll move to the end of the terrace under
the ilex trees. Villa Vivalanti is the most thoroughly satisfying place
I ever lived in.' She ran down the steps and joined him. 'Aren't those
little trees nice?' she asked, nodding toward a row of oleanders ranged
at mathematical intervals along the balustrade. 'I think that Aunt
Katherine and I planned things beautifully!'

'If every one were as well pleased with his own work as you appear to
be, this would be a contented world. There's nothing like the beautiful
enthusiasm of youth.'

'It's a very good thing to have, just the same,' said Marcia,
good-naturedly; 'and without mentioning any names, I know one man who
would be less disagreeable if he had more of it.'

'None of that!' said her uncle. 'Our pact was that if I stopped
grumbling about the villa being so abominably far from Rome, you were
not to utter any--er----'

'Unpleasant truths about Mr. Sybert? Very well, I'll not mention him
again; and you'll please not refer to the thirty-nine kilometres--it's
a bargain. Gerald, I judge, has found the fountain,' she added as a
delighted shriek issued from the grove.

'And a menagerie as well.'

'If he will only keep them out of doors! I shall dream of finding
lizards in my bed.'

'If you only dream of them you will be doing well. I dare say the place
is full of bats and lizards and owls and all manner of ruin-haunting
creatures.'

'You're such a pessimist, Uncle Howard. Between you and Aunt Katherine,
the poor villa won't have a shred of character left. For my part, I
approve of it all--particularly the ruins. I am dying to explore
them--do you think it's too late to-night?'

'Far too late; you'd get malaria, to say nothing of missing dinner.
Here comes Pietro now to announce the event.'

As the family entered the dining-room they involuntarily paused on the
threshold, struck by the contrast between the new and the old. In the
days of Cardinal Vivalanti the room had been the chapel, and it still
contained its Gothic ceiling, appropriately redecorated to its new uses
with grape-wreathed trellises, and, in the central panelling, Bacchus
crowned with vines. The very modern dinner-table, with its glass and
silver and shaded candles, looked ludicrously out of place in the long,
dusky, vaulted apartment, which, in spite of its rakish frescoes,
tenaciously preserved the air of a chapel. The glass doors at the end
were thrown wide to a little balcony which overlooked the garden and
the ilex grove; and the room was flooded with a nightingale's song.

Marcia clasped her hands ecstatically.

'Isn't this perfect? Aren't you glad we came, Aunt Katherine? I feel
like forgiving all my enemies! Uncle Howard, I'm going to be lovely to
Mr. Sybert.'

'Don't promise anything rash,' he laughed. 'You'll get acclimated in a
day or two.'

Gerald, in honour of the occasion, and because Marietta, under the
stress of excitement, had forgotten to give him his supper, was allowed
to dine _en famille_. Elated by the unwonted privilege and by his new
surroundings, he babbled gaily of the ride in the cars and the little
boys who turned 'summelsorts' by the roadside, and of the beautiful
two-tailed lizard of the fountain, whose charms he dwelt on lovingly.
But he had missed his noonday nap, and though he struggled bravely
through the first three courses, his head nodded over the chicken and
salad, and he was led away by Marietta still sleepily boasting, in a
blend of English and Italian, of the _bellissimi animali_ he would
catch _domane_ morning in the fountain.

'It is a pity,' said Marcia, as the sound of his prattle died away,
'Gerald hasn't some one his own age to play with.'

'Yes, it is a pity,' Copley returned. 'I passed a lonely childhood
myself, and I know how barren it is.'

'That is the chief reason that would make me want to go back to New
York,' said his wife.

Her husband smiled. 'I suppose there are children to be found outside
of New York?'

'There are the Kirkups in Rome,' she agreed; 'but they are so
boisterous; and they always quarrel with Gerald whenever they come to
play with him.'

'I am not sure, myself, but that Gerald quarrels with them,' returned
her husband. However fond he might be of his offspring, he cherished no
motherly delusions. 'But perhaps you are right,' he added, with
something of a sigh. 'It may be necessary to take him back to America
before long. I myself have doubts if this cosmopolitan atmosphere it
the best in which to bring up a boy.'

'I should have wished him to spend a winter in Paris for his French,'
said Mrs. Copley, plaintively; 'but I dare say he can learn it later.
Marcia didn't begin till she was twelve, and she has a very good
accent, I am sure.'

Mr. Copley twisted the handle of his glass in silence.

'I suppose, after all,' he said finally, to no one in particular, 'if
you manage to bring up a boy to be a decent citizen you've done
something in the world.'

'I don't know,' Marcia objected, with a half-laugh. 'If one man, whom
we will suppose is a decent citizen, brings up one boy to be a decent
citizen, and does nothing else, I don't see that much is gained to the
world. Your one man has merely shifted the responsibility.'

Mr. Copley shrugged a trifle. 'Perhaps the boy might be better able to
bear it.'

'Of course it would be easier for the man to think so,' she agreed.
'But if everybody passed on his responsibilities there wouldn't be much
progress. The boys might do the same, you know, when they grew up.'

Mrs. Copley rose, 'If you two are going to talk metaphysics, I shall go
into the salon and have coffee alone.'

'It's not metaphysics; it's theology,' her husband returned. 'Marcia is
developing into a terrible preacher.'

'I know it,' Marcia acknowledged. 'I'm growing deplorably moral; I
think it must be the Roman air.'

'It doesn't affect most people that way,' her uncle laughed. 'I don't
care for any coffee, Katherine. I will smoke a cigarette on the terrace
and wait for you out there.'

He disappeared through the balcony doors, and Marcia and her aunt
proceeded to the salon.

Marcia poured the coffee, and her aunt said as she received her cup, 'I
really believe your uncle is getting tired of Rome and will be ready to
go back before long.'

'I don't believe he's tired of Rome, Aunt Katherine. I think he's just
a little bit--well, discouraged.'

'Nonsense, child! he has nothing to be discouraged about; he is simply
getting restless again. I know the signs! I've never known him to stay
as long as this in one place before. I only hope now that he will not
think of any ridiculous new thing to do, but will be satisfied to go
back to New York and settle down quietly like other people.'

'It seems to me,' said Marcia, slowly, 'as if he might do more good
there, because he would understand better what the people need. There
are plenty of things to be done even in New York.'

'Oh, yes; when he once got settled he would find any amount of things
to take up his time. He might even try yachting, for a change; I am
sure that keeps men absorbed.'

Marcia sipped her coffee in silence and glanced out of the window at
her uncle, who was pacing up and down the terrace with his hands in his
pockets. He looked a rather lonely figure in the half-darkness. It
suddenly struck her, as she watched him, that she did not understand
him; she had scarcely realized before that there was anything to
understand.

Mrs. Copley set her cup down on the table, and Marcia rose. 'Let's go
out on the terrace, Aunt Katherine.'

'You go out, my dear, and I will join you later. I want to see if
Gerald is asleep. I neglected to have a crib sent out for him, and the
dear child thrashes around so--what with a bed four feet high and a
stone floor----'

'It would be disastrous!' Marcia agreed.

She crossed the loggia to the terrace and silently fell into step
beside her uncle. It was almost dark, and a crescent moon was hanging
low over the top of Guadagnolo. A faint lemon light still tinged the
west, throwing into misty relief the outline of the Alban hills. The
ilex grove was black--gruesomely black--and the happy song of the
nightingales and the splashing of the fountain sounded uncanny coming
from the darkness; but the white, irregular mass of the villa formed a
cheerful contrast, with its shining lights, which threw squares of
brightness on the marble terrace and the trees.

Marcia looked about with a deep breath. 'It's beautiful, isn't it,
Uncle Howard?' They paused a moment by the parapet and stood looking
down over the plain. 'Isn't the Campagna lovely,' she added, 'half
covered with mist?'

'Yes, it's lovely--and the mist means death to the peasants who live
beneath it.'

She exclaimed half impatiently:

'Uncle Howard, _why_ can't you let anything be beautiful here without
spoiling it by pointing out an ugliness beneath?'

'I'm sorry; it isn't my fault that the ugliness exists. Look upon the
mist as a blessed dew from heaven, if it makes you any happier.'

'Of course I should rather know the truth, but it seems as if the
Italians are happy in spite of things. They strike me as the happiest
people I have ever seen.'

'Ah, well, perhaps they are happier than we think.'

'I'm sure they are,' said Marcia, comfortably. 'Anglo-Saxons,
particularly New Englanders, and most particularly Mr. Howard Copley,
worry too much.'

'It's at least a fault the Italians haven't learned,' he replied. 'But,
after all, as you say, it may be the better fortune to have less and
worry less--I'd like to believe it.'




                               CHAPTER VI


ON the morning after their arrival, Marcia had risen early and set out
on horseback to explore the neighbourhood. As Castel Vivalanti,
accordingly, was engaged in its usual Saturday-morning sweeping, a
clatter of horses' hoofs suddenly sounded on the tiny Corso (the paving
is so villainous that a single horse, however daintily it may step,
sounds like a cavalcade), and running to the door, the inhabitants of
the village beheld the new _signorina Americana_ gaily riding up the
narrow way and smiling to the right and left, for all the world like
the queen herself. The women contented themselves with standing in the
doorways and staring open-mouthed, but the children ran boldly after,
until the signorina presently dismounted and bidding the groom hold her
horse, sat down upon a door-step and talked to them with as much
friendliness as though she had known them all her life. She ended by
asking them what in the world they liked best to eat, and they declared
in a single voice for '_Cioccolata_.'

Accordingly they moved in a body to the baker's, and, to Domenico's
astonishment, ordered all of the chocolate in the shop. And while he
was excitedly counting it out the signorina kept talking to him about
the weather and the scenery and the olive crop until he was so overcome
by the honour that he could do nothing but bob his head and murmur,
'_Si, si, eccelenza; si, si, eccelenza_,' to everything she said.

And as soon as she had mounted her horse again and ridden away, with a
final wave of her hand to the little black-eyed children, Domenico
hurried to the _Croce d'Oro_ to inform the landlord that he also had
had the honour of entertaining the _signorina Americana_, who had
bought chocolate to the amount of five lire--five lire! And had given
it all away! The blacksmith's wife, who had followed Domenico to hear
the news, remarked that, for her part, she thought it a sin to spend so
much for chocolate; the signorina might have given the money just as
well, and they could have had meat for Sunday. But Domenico was more
ready this time to condone the fault. '_Si, si_,' he returned, with a
nod of his head: 'the signorina meant well, no doubt, but she could not
understand the needs of poor people. He supposed that they lived on
chocolate all the time at the villa, and naturally did not realize that
persons who worked for their living found meat more nourishing.

When Marcia returned home with the announcement that she had visited
Castel Vivalanti, her uncle replied, with an elaborate frown, 'I
suppose you scattered soldi broadcast through the streets, and have
started fifty young Italians on the broad road to Pauperism.'

'Not a single soldo!' she reassured him. 'I distributed nothing more
demoralizing than a few cakes of chocolate.'

'You'll make a scientific philanthropist if you keep on,' Mr. Copley
laughed, but his inner reflections coincided somewhat with those of the
blacksmith's wife.

Marcia's explorations were likewise extended in other directions, and
before the first week was over she had visited most of the villages
from Palestrina to Subiaco. As a result, the chief article of diet in
the Sabine mountains bade fair to become sweet chocolate; while
Domenico, the baker, instead of being grateful for this unexpected flow
of custom, complained to his friends of the trouble it caused. No
sooner would he send into Rome for a fresh supply than the signorina
would come and carry the whole of it off. At that rate, it was clearly
impossible to keep it in stock.

By means of largesses of chocolate to the children, or possibly by a
smile and a friendly air, Marcia had established in a very short time a
speaking acquaintance with the whole neighbourhood. And on sunny
mornings, as she rode between the olive orchards and the wheat fields,
more than one worker straightened his back to call a pleased '_Buona
passeggiata_, signorina,' to the fair-haired stranger princess, who
came from the land across the water where, it was rumoured, gold could
be dug from the ground like potatoes and every one was rich.

All about that region the advent of the foreigners was the subject of
chief interest--especially because they were Americani, for many of the
people were thinking of becoming Americani themselves. The servants of
the villa, when they condescended to drink a glass of wine at the inn
of the _Croce d'Oro_, were almost objects of veneration, because they
could talk so intimately of the life these 'stranger princes' led--the
stranger princes would have been astonished could they have heard some
of the details of these recitals.

                  *       *       *       *       *

And so the Copley dynasty began at Castel Vivalanti. The life soon fell
into a daily routine, as life in even the best of places will. Three
meals and tea, a book in the shadiness of the ilex grove to the tune of
the splashing fountain, a siesta at noon, a drive in the afternoon, and
a long night's sleep were the sum of Vivalanti's resources. Marcia
liked it. Italy had got its hold upon her, and for the present she was
content to drift. But Mr. Copley, after a few days of lounging on the
balustrade, smoking countless cigarettes and hungrily reading such
newspapers as drifted out on the somewhat casual mails, had his horse
saddled one morning and rode to Palestrina to the station. After that
he went into Rome almost every day, and the peasants in the wayside
vineyards came to know him as well as his niece; but they did not take
off their hats and smile as they did to her, for he rode past with
unseeing eyes. Rich men, they said, had no thought for such as they,
and they turned back to their work with a sullen scowl. Work at the
best is hard enough, and it is a pity when the smile that makes it
lighter is withheld; Howard Copley would have been the last to do it
had he realized. But his thoughts were bent on other things, and how
could the peasants know that while he galloped by so carelessly his
mind was planning a way to get them bread?

Marcia spent many half-hours the first few weeks in loitering about the
ruins of the old villa. It was a dream-haunted spot which spoke
pathetically of a bygone time with bygone ideals. She could never quite
reconcile the crumbling arches, the fantastic rock-work, and the
grass-grown terraces with the 'Young Italy' of Monte Citorio thirty
miles away. To eyes fresh from the New World it seemed half unreal.

One afternoon she had started to walk across the fields to Castel
Vivalanti, but the fields had proved too sunny and she had stopped in
the shade of the cypresses instead. Even the ruins seemed to be
revivified by the warm touch of spring. Blue and white anemones,
rose-coloured cyclamen, yellow laburnum, burst from every cranny of the
stones. Marcia glanced about with an air of delighted approval. A Pan
with his pipes was all that was needed to make the picture complete.
She dropped down on the coping of the fountain, and with her chin in
her hands gazed dreamily at the moss-bearded merman who, two centuries
before, had spouted water from his twisted conch-shell. She was
suddenly startled from her reverie by hearing a voice exclaim, '_Buon
giorno_, signorina!' and she looked up quickly to find Paul Dessart.

'Mr. Dessart!' she cried in amazement. 'Where in the world did you come
from?'

'The inn of _Sant' Agapito_ at Palestrina. Benoit and I are making it
the centre of a sketching expedition. We get a sort of hill fever every
spring, and when the disease reaches a certain point we pack up and set
out for the Sabines.'

'And how did you manage to find us?'

'Purely chance,' he returned more or less truthfully. 'I picked out
this road as a promising field, and when I came to the gateway, being
an artist, I couldn't resist the temptation of coming in. I didn't know
that it was Villa Vivalanti or that I should find you here.' He sat
down on the edge of the fountain and looked about.

'Well?' Marcia inquired.

'I don't wonder that you wanted to exchange Rome for this! May I make a
little sketch, and will you stay and talk to me until it is finished?'

'That depends upon how long it takes you to make a little sketch. I
shall subscribe to no _carte-blanche_ promises.'

He got out a box of water-colours from one pocket of his Norfolk jacket
and a large pad from the other, and having filled his cup at the little
rush-choked stream which once had fed the fountain, set to work without
more ado.

'I heard from the Roystons this morning,' said Marcia, presently, and
immediately she was sorry that she had not started some other subject.
In their former conversations Paul's relations with his family had
never proved a very fortunate topic.

'Any bad news?' he inquired flippantly.

'They will reach Rome in a week or so.'

'Holy Week--I might have known it! Miss Copley,' he looked at her
appealingly, 'you know what an indefatigable woman my aunt is. She will
make me escort her to every religious function that blessed city
offers; it isn't her way to miss anything.'

Marcia smiled slightly at the picture; it was lifelike.

'I shall be stopping in Palestrina when they come,' he added.

She let this observation pass in a disapproving silence.

'Oh, well,' he sighed, 'I'll stay and tote them around if you think I
ought. The Bible says, you know, "Love your relatives and show mercy
unto them that despitefully use you."'

Marcia flashed a sudden laugh and then looked grave.

Paul glanced up at her quickly. 'I suppose my aunt told you no end of
bad things about me?'

'Was there anything to tell?'

He shrugged his shoulders. 'I've committed the unpardonable sin of
preferring art in Rome to coal in Pittsburg.'

He dropped the subject and turned back to his picture, and Marcia sat
watching him as he industriously splashed in colour. Occasionally their
eyes met when he raised his head, and if his own lingered a moment
longer than convention warranted--being an artist, he was excusable,
for she was distinctly an addition to the moss-covered fountain. The
young man may have prolonged the situation somewhat; in any case, the
sun's rays were beginning to slant when he finally pocketed his colours
and presented the picture with a bow. It was a dainty little sketch of
a ruined grotto and a broken statue, with the sunlight flickering
through the trees on the flower-sprinkled grass.

'Really, is it for me?' she asked. 'It's lovely, Mr. Dessart; and when
I go away from Rome I can remember both you and the villa by it.'

'When you go away?' he asked, with an audible note of anxiety in his
voice. 'But I thought you had come to live with your uncle.'

'Oh, for the present,' she returned. 'But I'm going back to America in
the indefinite future.'

He breathed an exaggerated sigh of relief.

'The indefinite future doesn't bother me. Before it comes you'll change
your mind--everybody does. It's merely the present I want to be sure
of.'

Marcia glanced at him a moment with a half-provocative laugh; and then,
without responding, she turned her head and appeared to study the stone
village up on the height. She was quite conscious that he was watching
her, and she was equally conscious that her pale-blue muslin gown and
her rosebud hat formed an admirable contrast to the frowning old
merman. When she turned back there was a shade of amusement in her
glance. Paul did not speak, but he did not lower his eyes nor in any
degree veil his visible admiration. She rose with a half-shrug and
brushed back a stray lock of hair that was blowing in her eyes.

'I'm hungry,' she remarked in an exasperatingly matter-of-fact tone.
'Let's go back and get some tea.'

'Will Mrs. Copley receive a jacket and knickerbockers?'

'Mrs. Copley will be delighted. Visitors are a godsend at Villa
Vivalanti.'

They passed from the deep shade of the cypresses to the sun-flecked
laurel path that skirted the wheat field. As they strolled along, in no
great hurry to reach the villa, they laughed and chatted lightly; but
the most important things they said occurred in the pauses when no
words were spoken. The young man carried his hat in his hand,
carelessly switching the branches with it as he passed. His shining
light-brown hair--almost the colour of Marcia's own--lay on his
forehead in a tangled mass and stirred gently in the wind. She noted it
in an approving sidewise glance, and quickly turned away again lest he
should look up and catch her eyes upon him.

In the ilex grove they paused for a moment as the sound of mingled
voices reached them from the terrace.

'Listen,' Marcia whispered, with her finger on her lips; and as she
recognized the tones she made a slight grimace. 'My two enemies! The
Contessa Torrenieri and Mr. Sybert. The contessa has a villa at Tivoli.
This is very kind of her, is it not? Nine miles is a long distance just
to pay a call.'

As they advanced toward the tea-table, placed under the trees at the
end of the terrace, they found an unexpectedly august party--not only
the Contessa Torrenieri and the secretary of the Embassy, but the
American consul-general as well. The men had evidently but just
arrived, as Mrs. Copley was still engaged with their welcome.

'Mr. Melville, you come at exactly the right time. We are having
mushroom ragout to-night, which, if I remember, is your favourite
dish--but why didn't you bring your wife?'

'My wife, my dear lady, is at present in Capri and shows no intention
of coming home. Your husband, pitying my loneliness, insisted on
bringing me out for the night.'

'I am glad that he did--we shall hope to see you later, however, when
Mrs. Melville can come too. Mr. Sybert,' she added, turning toward the
younger man, 'you can't know how we miss not having you drop in at all
hours of the day. We didn't realize what a necessary member of the
family you had become until we had to do without you.'

Marcia, overhearing this speech, politely suppressed a smile as she
presented the young painter. He was included in the general acclaim.

'This is charming!' Mrs. Copley declared. 'I was just complaining to
the Contessa Torrenieri that not a soul had visited us since we came
out to the villa, and here are three almost before the words are out of
my mouth!'

Pietro, appearing with a trayful of cups, put an end to these
amenities; and, reinforced by Gerald, they had an unusually festive
tea-party. Mr. Copley had once remarked concerning Paul Dessart that he
would be an ornament to any dinner-table, and he undoubtedly proved
himself an ornament to-day.

Melville, introducing the subject of a famous monastery lately
suppressed by the government, gave rise to a discussion involving many
and various opinions. The contessa and Dessart hotly defended the
homeless monks; while the other men, from a political point of view,
were inclined to applaud the action of the premier. Their arguments
were strong, but the little contessa, two slender hands gesticulating
excitedly, stanchly held her own; though a 'White' in politics, her
sympathies, on occasion, stuck persistently to the other side. The
church had owned the property for five centuries, the government for a
quarter of a century. Which had the better right? And aside from the
justice of the question--Dessart backed her up--for ascetic reasons
alone, the monks should be allowed to stay. Who wished to have the
beauties of frescoed chapels and carved choir-stalls pointed out by
blue-uniformed government officials whose coats didn't fit? It spoiled
the poetry. Names of cardinals and prelates and Italian princes passed
glibly; and the politicians finally retired beaten. Marcia, listening,
thought approvingly that the young artist was a match for the
diplomats, and she could not help but acknowledge further that whatever
faults the contessa might possess, dullness was not among them.

It was Gerald, however, who furnished the chief diversion that
afternoon. Upon being forbidden to take a third _maritozzo_, he rose
reluctantly, shook the crumbs from his blouse, and drifted off toward
the ilex grove to occupy himself with the collection of lizards which
he kept in a box under a stone garden seat. The group about the
tea-table was shortly startled by a splash and a scream, and they
hastened with one accord to the scene of the disaster. Mr. Copley,
arriving first, was in time to pluck his son from the fountain, like
Achilles, by a heel.

'What's the matter, Howard?' Mrs. Copley called as the others anxiously
hurried up.

'Nothing serious,' he reassured her. 'Gerald has merely been trying to
identify himself with his environment.'

Gerald, dripping and sputtering, came out at this point with the
astounding assertion that Marietta had pushed him in. Marietta chimed
into the general confusion with a volley of Latin ejaculations. She
push him in! _Madonna mia_, what a fib! Why should she do such a thing
as that when it would only put her to the trouble of dressing him
again? She had told him repeatedly not to fall into the fountain, but
the moment her back was turned he disobeyed.

Amid a chorus of laughter and suggestions, of wails and protestations,
the nurse, the boy, and his father and mother set out for the house to
settle the question, leaving the guests at the scene of the tragedy. As
they strolled back to the terrace the contessa very adroitly held
Sybert on one side and Dessart on the other, while with a great deal of
animation and gesture she recounted a diverting bit of Roman gossip.
Melville and Marcia followed after, the latter with a speculative eye
on the group in front, and an amused appreciation of the fact that the
young artist would very much have preferred dropping behind. Possibly
the contessa divined this too; in any case, she held him fast. The
consul-general was discussing a criticism he had recently read of the
American diplomatic service, and his opinion of the writer was
vigorous. Melville's views were likely to be both vigorously conceived
and vigorously expressed.

'In any case,' he summed up his remarks, 'America has no call to be
ashamed of her representative to Italy. His Excellency is a fine
example of the right man in the right place.'

'And his Excellency's nephew?' she inquired, her eyes on the lounging
figure in front of them.

'Is an equally fine example of the right man in the wrong place.'

'I thought you were one of the people who stood up for him.'

'You thought I was one of the people who stood up for him? Well,
certainly, why not?' Melville's tone contained the suggestion of a
challenge; he had fought so many battles in Sybert's behalf that a
belligerent attitude over the question had become subconscious.

'Oh, I don't know,' said Marcia vaguely. 'Lots of people don't like
him.'

Melville struck a match, lit a cigar, and vigorously puffed it into a
glow; then he observed: 'Lots of people are idiots.'

Marcia laughed and apologized--

'Excuse me, but you are all so funny about Mr. Sybert. One day I hear
the most extravagant things in his praise, and the next, the most
disparaging things in his dispraise. It's difficult to know what to
believe of such a changeable person as that.'

'Just let me tell you one thing, Miss Marcia, and that is, that in this
world a man who has no enemies is not to be trusted--I don't know how
it may be in the world to come. At for Sybert, you may safely believe
what his friends say of him.'

'In that case he certainly does not show his best side to the world.'

'He probably thinks his best side nobody's business but his own.' And
then, as a thought re-occurred to him, he glanced at her a moment in
silence, while a brief smile flickered across his aggressively forceful
face. She could not interpret the smile, but it was vaguely irritating,
and as he did not have anything further to say, she pursued her theme
rough-shod.

'When you see a person who doesn't take any interest in his own
country; whose only aim is to be thought a cosmopolitan, a man of the
world; whose business in life is to attend social functions and make
after-dinner speeches--well, naturally, you can't blame people for not
taking him very seriously.' She finished with a gesture of disdain.

'You were telling me a little while ago, Miss Marcia, about some of the
people in Castel Vivalanti. You appear to be rather proud of your
broad-mindedness in occasionally being able to detect the real man
underneath the peasant--don't you think you might push your penetration
just one step further and discover a real man, a personality, beneath
the man of the world? Once in a while it exists.'

'You can't argue me into liking Mr. Sybert,' she laughed; 'Uncle Howard
has tried it and failed.'

Mr. and Mrs. Copley returned shortly to their guests; and the contessa,
bemoaning the nine miles, announced that she must go. Mr. Copley
suggested that nine miles would be no longer after dinner than before,
but the lady was obdurate and her carriage was ordered. She took her
departure amid a graceful flurry of farewell. The contessa had an
unerring instinct for effect, and her exits and her entrances were
divertingly spectacular. She bade Mrs. Copley, Marcia, and the
consul-general good-bye upon the terrace, and trailed across the marble
flagging, attended--at a careful distance from her train--by the three
remaining men. Sybert handed her into the carriage, Dessart arranged
the lap-robe, while Copley brought up the rear, gingerly bearing her
lace parasol. With a gay little tilt of her white-plumed hat toward the
group on the terrace and an all-inclusive flash of black eyes, she was
finally off, followed by the courtly bows of her three cavaliers.

Marcia, with Sybert and Dessart on either hand, continued to stroll up
and down the terrace, while her aunt and uncle entertained Melville
amid the furnished comfort of the loggia. Sybert would ordinarily have
joined the group on the loggia, but he happened to be in the middle of
a discussion with Dessart regarding the new and, according to most
people, scandalous proposition for levelling the Seven Hills. The two
men seemed to be diametrically opposed to all their views, and were
equally far apart in their methods of arguing. Dessart would lunge into
flights of exaggerated rhetoric, piling up adjectives and metaphors
until by sheer weight he had carried his listeners off their feet;
while Sybert, with a curt phrase, would knock the corner-stone from
under the finished edifice. The latter's method of fencing had always
irritated Marcia beyond measure. He had a fashion of stating his point,
and then abandoning his adversary's eloquence in mid-air, as if it were
not worth his while to argue further. To-day, having come to a deadlock
in the matter of the _piano regolatore_, they dropped the subject, and
pausing by the terrace parapet, they stood looking down on the plain
below.

Dessart scanned it eagerly with eyes quick to catch every contrast and
tone; he noted the varying purples of the distance, the narrow ribbon
of glimmering gold where sky and plain met the sea, the misty whiteness
of Rome, the sharply cut outline of Monte Soracte. It was perfect as a
picture--composition, perspective, colour-scheme--nothing might be
bettered. He sighed a contented sigh.

'Even I,' he murmured, 'couldn't suggest a single change.'

A slight smile crept over Sybert's sombre face.

'I could suggest a number.'

The young painter brought a reproachful gaze to bear upon him.

'Ah,' he agreed, 'and I can imagine the direction they'd take! Miss
Copley,' he added, turning to Marcia, 'let me tell you of the thing I
saw the other day on the Roman Campagna: a sight which was enough to
make a right-minded man sick. I saw--' there was a tragic pause--a
McCormick reaper and binder!'

Sybert uttered a short laugh.

'I am glad that you did; and I only wish it were possible for one to
see more.'

'Man! Man! You don't know what you are saying!' Paul cried. There were
tears in his voice. 'A McCormick reaper, I tell you, painted red and
yellow and blue--the man who did it should have been compelled to drink
his paint.'

Marcia laughed, and he added disgustedly: 'The thing sows and reaps and
binds all at once. One shudders to think of its activities--and that in
the Agra Romana, which picturesque peasants have spaded and planted and
mowed by hand for thousands of years.'

'Not, however, a particularly economical way of cultivating the
Campagna,' Sybert observed.

'Economical way of cultivating the Campagna!' Dessart repeated the
words with a groan. 'Is there no place in the world sacred to beauty?
Must America flood every corner of the habitable globe with reapers and
sewing-machines and trolley-cars? The way they're sophisticating these
adorably antique peasants is criminal.'

'That's the way it seems to me,' Marcia agreed cordially. 'Uncle Howard
says they haven't enough to eat; but they certainly do look happy, and
they don't look thin. I can't help believing he exaggerates the
trouble.'

'An Italian, Miss Copley, who doesn't know where his next meal is
coming from, will lie on his back in the sunshine, thinking how pretty
the sky looks; and he will get as much pleasure from the prospect as he
would from his dinner. If that isn't the art of being happy, I don't
know what is. And that is why I hate to have Italy spoiled.'

'Well, Dessart, I fancy we all hate that,' Sybert returned. 'Though I
am afraid we should quarrel over definitions.' He stretched out his
hand toward the west, where the plain joined the sea by the ruins of
Ostia and the Pontine Marshes. It was a great, barren, desolate waste;
unpeopled, uncultivated, fever-stricken.

'Don't you think it would be rather a fine thing,' he asked, 'to see
that land drained and planted and lived on again as it was perhaps two
thousand years ago?'

Marcia shook her head. 'I should rather have it left just as it is.
Possibly a few might gain, but think of the poetry and picturesqueness
and romance that the many would lose! Once in a while, Mr. Sybert, it
seems as if utility might give way to poetry--especially on the Roman
Campagna. It is more fitting that it should be desolate and bare, with
only a few wandering shepherds and herds, and no buildings but ruined
towers and Latin tombs--a sort of burial-place for Ancient Rome.'

'The living have a few rights--even in Rome.'

'They seem to have a good many,' Dessart agreed. 'Oh, I know what you
reformers want! You'd like to see the city full of smoke-stacks and
machinery, and the Campagna laid out in garden plots, and everybody
getting good wages and six per cent. interest; with all the people
dressed alike in ready-made clothing instead of peasant costume, and
nobody poor and nobody picturesque.'

Sybert did not reply for a moment, as with half-shut eyes he studied
the distance. He was thinking of a ride he had taken three days before.
He had gone out with a hunting-party to one of the great Campagna
estates, owned by a Roman prince whose only interest in the land was to
draw from it every possible _centesime_ of income. They had stopped to
water their horses at a cluster of straw huts where the farm labourers
lived, and Sybert had dismounted and gone into one of them to talk to
the people. It was dark and damp, with a dirt floor and rude bunks
along the sides. There, fifty human beings lived crowded together,
breathing the heavy, pestilential air. They had come down to bands from
their mountain homes, searching for work, and had sold their lives to
the prince for thirty cents a day.

The picture flashed across him now of their pale, apathetic faces, of
the dumb reproach in their eyes, and for a second he felt tempted to
describe it. But with the reflection that neither of the two before him
would care any more about it than had the landlord prince, he changed
his expression into a careless shrug.

'It will be some time before we'll see that,' he answered Dessart's
speech.

'But you'd like it, wouldn't you?' Marcia persisted.

'Yes; wouldn't you?'

'No,' she laughed, 'I can't say that I should! I decidedly prefer the
peasants as they are. They are far more attractive when they are poor,
and since they are happy in spite of it, I don't see why it is our
place to object.'

Sybert eyed the pavement impassively a moment: then he raised his head
and turned to Marcia. He swept her a glance from head to foot which
took in every detail of her dainty gown, her careless grace as she
leaned against the balustrade, and he made no endeavour to conceal the
look of critically cold contempt in his eyes. Marcia returned his
glance with an air of angry challenge; not a word was spoken, but it
was an open declaration of war.




                              CHAPTER VII


THE Roystons approached Rome by easy stages along the Riviera, and as
their prospective movements were but vaguely outlined even to
themselves, they suffered their approach to remain unheralded. Paul
Dessart, since his talk with Marcia, had taken a little dip into the
future, with the result that he had decided to swallow any hurt
feelings he might possess and pay dutiful court to his relatives. The
immediate rewards of such a course were evident.

One sunny morning early in April (he had been right in his forecast of
the time: Palm Sunday loomed a week ahead) a carriage drew up before
the door of his studio, and Mrs. Royston and the Misses Royston
alighted, squabbled with the driver over the fare, and told him he need
not wait. They rang the bell, and during the pause that followed stood
upon the door-step, dubiously scanning the neighbourhood. It was one of
the narrow, tortuous streets between the Corso and the river; a street
of many colours and many smells, with party-coloured washings
fluttering from the windows, with pretty tumble-haired children in gold
ear-rings and shockingly scanty clothing sprawling underfoot. The house
itself presented a blank face of peeling stucco to the street, with
nothing but the heavily barred windows below and an ornamental cornice
four stories up to suggest that it had once been a palace and a
stronghold.

Mrs. Royston turned from her inspection of the street to ring the bell
again. There was, this time, a suggestion of impatience in her touch. A
second wait, and the door was finally opened by one of the fantastic
little shepherd models, who haunt the Spanish steps. He took off his
hat with a polite '_Permesso_, signore,' as he darted up the stairs
ahead of them to point the way and open the door at the top. They
arrived at the end of the five flights somewhat short of breath, and
were ushered into a swept and garnished workroom, where Paul, in a
white blouse, his sleeves rolled to the elbows, was immersed in a large
canvas, almost too preoccupied to look up. He received his relatives
with an air of delighted surprise, stood quite still while his aunt
implanted a ponderous kiss upon his cheek, and after a glance at his
cousins, kissed them of his own accord.

Mrs. Royston sat down and surveyed the room. It was irreproachably
workmanlike, and had been so for a week. Visibly impressed, she
transferred her gaze to her nephew.

'Paul, you _are_ improved,' she said at length.

'My dear aunt, I am five years older than I was five years ago.'

'Well,' with a sigh of relief, 'I actually believe you are!'

'Paul, I had no idea you were such a desirable cousin,' was Margaret's
frank comment, as she returned from an inspection of the room to a
reinspection of him. 'Eleanor said you wore puffed velveteen trousers.
You don't, do you?'

'Never had a pair of puffed velveteen trousers in my life.'

'Oh, yes, you did!' said Eleanor. 'You can't fib down the past that
way. Mamma and I met you in the Luxembourg gardens in broad daylight
wearing puffed blue velveteen trousers, with a bottle of wine in one
pocket and a loaf of bread in the other.'

'Let the dead past bury its dead!' he pleaded. 'I go to an English
tailor on the Corso now.'

'Marcia Copley wrote that she was very much pleased with you, but she
didn't tell us how good-looking you were,' said Margaret, still frank.

Paul reddened a trifle as he repudiated the charge with a laughing
gesture.

'Don't you think Miss Copley's nice?' pursued Margaret. 'You'd better
think so,' she added, 'for she's one of our best friends.'

Paul reddened still more, as he replied indifferently that Miss Copley
appeared very nice. He hadn't seen much of her, of course.

'I hope,' said his aunt, 'that you have been polite.'

'My dear aunt,' he objected patiently, 'I really don't go out of my way
to be impolite to people,' and he took the Baedeker from her hand and
sat down beside her. 'What places do you want to see first?' he
inquired.

They were soon deep in computations of the galleries, ruins, and
churches that should be visited in conjunction, and half an hour later,
Paul and Margaret in one carriage, with Mrs. Royston and Eleanor in a
second, were trotting toward the Colosseum; while Paul was reflecting
that the path of duty need not of necessity be a thorny one.

During the next week or so Villa Vivalanti saw little more of Marcia
than of her uncle. She spent the greater part of her time in Rome,
visiting galleries and churches, with studio teas and other Lenten
relaxations to lighten the rigour of sight-seeing. Paul Dessart proved
himself an attentive cicerone, and his devotion to duty was not
unrewarded; the dim crypts and chapels, the deep-embrasured windows of
galleries and palaces afforded many chances for stolen scraps of
conversation. And Paul was not one to waste his opportunities. The
spring was ideal; Rome was flooded with sunshine and flowers and the
Italian joy of being alive. The troubles of Italy's paupers, which Mr.
Copley found so absorbing, received, during these days, little
consideration from his niece. Marcia was too busy living her own life
to have eyes for any but happy people. She looked at Italy through
rose-coloured glasses, and Italy, basking in the spring sunshine,
smiled back sympathetically.

                  *       *       *       *       *

One morning an accident happened at the villa, and though it may not
seem important to the world in general, still, as events turned out, it
proved to be the pivot upon which destiny turned. Gerald fell over the
parapet, landing eight feet below--butter-side down--with a bleeding
nose and a broken front tooth. He could not claim this time that
Marietta had pushed him over, as it was clearly proven that Marietta,
at the moment, was sitting in the scullery doorway, smiling at
Francois. In consequence Marietta received her wages, a ticket to Rome,
and fifty lire to dry her tears. A new nurse was hastily summoned from
Castel Vivalanti. She was a niece of Domenic, the baker, and had served
in the household of Prince Barberini at Palestrina, which was
recommendation enough.

As to the broken tooth, it was a first tooth and shaky at that. Most
people would have contented themselves with the reflection that the
matter would right itself in the course of nature. But Mrs. Copley, who
perhaps had a tendency to be over-solicitous on a question involving
her son's health or beauty, decided that Gerald must go to the
dentist's. Gerald demurred, and Marcia, who had previously had no
thought of going into Rome that afternoon, offered to accompany the
party, for the sake--she said--of keeping up his courage in the train.
As they were preparing to start, she informed Mrs. Copley that she
thought she would stay with the Roystons all night, since they had
planned to visit the Forum by moonlight some evening, and this appeared
a convenient time. In the Roman station she abandoned Gerald to his
fate, and drove to the _Hotel de Londres et Paris_.

She found the ladies just sitting down to their midday breakfast and
delighted to see her. It developed, however, that they had an
unbreakable engagement for the evening, and the plan of visiting the
Forum was accordingly out of the question.

'No matter,' said Marcia, drawing off her gloves; 'I can come in some
other day; it's always moonlight in Rome'; and they settled themselves
to discussing plans for the afternoon. The hotel porter had given
Margaret a permesso for the royal palace and stables, and being
interested in the domestic arrangements of kings, she was insistent
that they visit the Quirinal. But Mrs. Royston, who was conscientiously
bent on first exhausting the heavier attractions set forth in Baedeker,
declared for the Lateran museum. The matter was still unsettled when
they rose from the table and were presented with the cards of Paul
Dessart and M. Adolphe Benoit.

Paul's voice settled the question: the city was too full of pilgrims
for any pleasure to be had within the walls; why not take advantage of
the pleasant weather to drive out to the monastery of Tre Fontane? But
the matter did not eventually arrange itself as happily as he had
hoped, since he found himself in one carriage and Marcia in the other.
At the monastery the monks were saying office in the main chapel when
they arrived, and they paused a few minutes to listen to the deep rise
and fall of the Gregorian chant as it echoed through the long, bare
nave. The dim interior, the low, monotonous music, the unseen monks,
made an effective whole. Paul, awake to the possibilities of the
occasion, did his best to draw Marcia into conversation, but she was
tantalizingly unresponsive. The guide-book in Mrs. Royston's hands and
the history of the order appeared to absorb her whole attention.

Fortune, however, was finally on his side. Mrs. Royston elected to
stop, on their way back to the city, at St. Paul's without the Walls,
and the whole party once more alighted. Within the basilica, Mrs.
Royston, guide-book in hand, commenced her usual conscientious
inspection, while Eleanor and the young Frenchman strolled about,
commenting on the architecture. Margaret had heard that one of the
mosaic popes in the frieze had diamond eyes, and she was insistently
bent on finding him. Marcia and Paul followed her a few minutes, but
they had both seen the church many times before, and both were at
present but mildly interested in diamond-eyed popes.

The door of the cloisters stood ajar, and they presently left the
others and strolled into the peaceful enclosure with its brick-flagged
floor and quaintly twisted columns. It was tranquil and empty, with no
suggestion of the outside world. They turned and strolled down the
length of the flagging, where the shadow of the columns alternated with
gleaming bars of sunshine. The sleepy, old-world atmosphere cast its
spell about them; Marcia's tantalizing humour and Paul's impatience
fell away. They walked on in silence, until presently the silence made
itself awkward and Marcia began to talk about the carving of the
columns, the flowers in the garden, the monks who tended them. Paul
responded half abstractedly, and he finally broke out with what he was
thinking of: a talk they had had that afternoon several weeks before in
the Borghese gardens.

'Most men wouldn't care for this,' he nodded toward the prim little
garden with its violets and roses framed in by the pillared cloister
and higher up by the dull grey walls of the church and monastery. 'But
a few do. Since that is the case, why not let the majority mine their
coal and build their railroads, and the very small minority who do care
stay and appreciate it? It is fortunate that we don't all like the same
things, for there's a great variety of work to be done. Of course,' he
added, 'I know well enough I'm never going to do anything very great; I
don't set up for a genius. But to do a few little things well--isn't
that something?'

They had reached the opposite end of the cloisters, and paused by one
of the pillars, leaning against the balustrade.

'You think it's shirking one's duty not to live in America?' he asked.

'I don't know,' Marcia smiled vaguely. 'I think--perhaps I'm changing
my mind.'

'I only know of one thing,' he said in a low tone, 'that would make me
want to be exiled from Italy.'

Marcia had a quick foreboding that she knew what he was going to say,
and for a moment she hesitated; then her eyes asked: 'What is that?'

Paul looked down at the sun-barred pavement in silence, and then he
looked up in her face and smiled steadily. 'If you lived out of Italy.'

Marcia received this in silence, while she dropped her eyes to the
effigy of a dead monk set in the pavement and commenced mechanically
following the Latin inscription. There was still time; she was still
mistress of the situation. By a laugh, an adroit turn, she could
overlook his words; could bring their relations back again to their
normal footing. But she was by no means sure that she wished to bring
them back to their normal footing; she felt a sudden, quite strong
curiosity to know what he would say next.

'Hang it! Marcia,' he exclaimed. 'I suppose you want to marry a prince,
or something like that?'

'A prince?' she inquired. 'Why a prince?'

'Oh, it's what you women are always after--having a coronet on your
carriage door, with all the servants bowing and saying, "_Si, si,
eccelenza_," every time you turn around.'

'It would be fun,' she agreed. 'Do you happen to know of any desirable
unmarried princes?'

'There aren't any.'

'No? Why, I met one the other day that I thought quite charming. His
family is seven hundred years old, and he owns two castles and three
villages.'

'He wouldn't stay charming. You'd find the castles damp, and the
villages dirty, and the prince stupid.' He dropped his hand over hers
where it rested on the balustrade. 'You'd better take me, Marcia; in
the long run you'll find me nicer.'

Marcia shook her head, but she did not draw away her hand. 'Really,
Paul, I don't know--and there's nothing I hate so much in the world as
making up my mind. You shouldn't ask such unanswerable things.'

'Look, mamma! aren't the cloisters lovely?' Margaret's voice suddenly
sounded across the little court. 'Oh, there are Marcia and Paul over
there! We wondered where you had disappeared to.'

'Oh, the deuce!' Paul exclaimed as he put his hands in his pockets and
leaned back against the pillar. 'I told you,' he added, with a laugh,
'that my family always arrived when they were not wanted!'

They all strolled about together, and Marcia scarcely glanced at him
again. But her consciousness was filled with his words, and it required
all her self-possession to keep up her part of the conversation. As
they started on, Mrs. Royston suggested that they stop a second time at
the English cemetery just within the gate. Marcia, looking at her
watch, saw with a feeling of relief that she would have to go straight
on if she were to catch Mrs. Copley and Gerald in time for the six
o'clock train. Bidding them good-bye at the Porta San Paolo, she
hastily and emphatically refused Paul's proposition to drive to the
station with her.

'No, indeed, Mr. Dessart,' she called out, as he was making
arrangements with Mrs. Royston to meet later at the hotel, 'I don't
want you to come with me; I shouldn't think of taking you away. My aunt
will be at the station, and I am perfectly capable of getting there
alone. Really, I don't want to trouble you.'

He put his foot on the carriage-step.

'It's no trouble,' he smiled.

'No, no; I would rather go alone. I shall _really_ be angry if you
come,' she insisted in a low tone.

The young man shrugged and removed his foot from the step.

'As you please,' he returned in a tone which carried an impression of
slightly wounded feelings. The driver looked back expectantly, waiting
for his directions. Paul hesitated a moment, and then turned toward her
again as if inquiring the way. 'Is there any hope for me?' he said.

She looked away without answering.

'There's no other man?' he added quickly.

Marcia for a second looked up in his face. 'No,' she shook her head,
'there's no other man.'

He straightened up, with a happy laugh. 'Then I'll win,' he whispered,
and he shook her hand as if on a compact.

'_Stazione_,' he called to the driver. And as the carriage started,
Marcia glanced back and nodded toward the Roystons, with a quick smile
for Paul.




                              CHAPTER VIII


'AH, Sybert, you're just the man I wanted to see!' Melville came up the
walk of the palazzo occupied by the American ambassador as Sybert,
emerging from the door, paused on the top step to draw on his gloves.

'In that case,' the latter returned, 'it's well you didn't come five
minutes later, or I should have been lost to the world for the
afternoon. What's up?'

'Nothing serious. Can you spare me a few moments' talk? I won't take up
your time if you are in a hurry.'

'Not in the least. I'm entirely at your disposal. Nothing on for the
afternoon, and I was preparing to loaf.'

The two turned back into the house and crossed the hall to the
ambassador's private library. Melville closed the door and regarded his
companion a trifle quizzically. Sybert dropped into a chair, indicated
another, and pushed a box of cigars and some matches across the table;
then he looked up and caught Melville's expression.

'Well, what's up?' he asked again.

The consul-general selected a cigar with some deliberation, bit off the
end, and regarded it critically, while his smile broadened. 'I have
just returned from the mass meeting of the foreign residents,' he
remarked.

'That should have been entertaining.'

'It was,' he admitted. 'There was some spirited discussion as to the
best way of suppressing the riots.'

'And how did they decide to do it?'

'They have appointed a committee.'

'Of course a committee!' Sybert laughed. 'And what is the committee to
do? Wait on the ministers and invite them to reconstruct their morals?
Ask the King to spend a little less money on the soldiers' uniforms and
a little more on their rations?'

'The Committee,' said Melville, 'is to raise money for food, and to
assist the government as far as possible in quieting the people and
suppressing the agitators.'

'Ah!' breathed Sybert.

'And,' he added, with his eye on the young man, 'I have the honour of
informing you that you were made chairman.'

'Oh, the devil!'

'This is not an official notification,' he pursued blandly; 'but I
thought you'd like to hear the news.'

'Who's at the bottom of this? Why, in heaven's name, didn't you stop
them?'

'I couldn't very well; I was chairman of the meeting.'

Sybert's usual easy nonchalance had vanished. He rose to his feet and
took one or two turns about the room.

'I don't see why I should be shoved into it--I wish some of these
officious fools would go back home, where they belong. I won't serve on
any such committee; I'll be hanged if I will! I'll resign.'

'Nonsense, Sybert; you can't do that. It would be too marked. People
would think you had some reason for not wanting to serve. It was very
natural that your name should have occurred for the position; you have
lived in Rome longer than most of us, and are supposed to understand
the conditions and to be interested in good government.'

'It puts me in a mighty queer position.'

'I don't see why.' The elder man's tone had grown cool. 'They naturally
took it for granted that you, as well as the rest of us, would want to
have the riots suppressed and choke off any latent tendencies toward
revolution in this precious populace.'

'It was the work of a lot of damned busybodies who wanted to see what I
would do.'

Melville suppressed a momentary smile. 'However,' he remarked, 'I see
no reason why you should be so reluctant about serving in a good
cause--I don't suppose you wish to see a revolution any more than the
rest of us.'

'Heavens, no! It wouldn't do any good; the government's got the army to
back it; the revolutionists would only be sent to the galleys for their
trouble, and the police oppression would be worse than ever.'

He swung up and down the room a couple of times, and then pausing with
his hands in his pockets, stared moodily out of the window. Melville
smoked and watched him, a shade of uneasiness in his glance. Just what
position Laurence Sybert occupied in Rome--what unofficial position,
that is--was a mystery to the most of his friends. Melville understood
him as well as any one, with the exception of Howard Copley; but even
he was at times quite unprepared for the intimate knowledge Sybert
displayed in affairs which, on the surface, did not concern him. Sybert
was distinctly not a babbler, and this tendency toward being
close-mouthed had given rise to a vast amount of speculative interest
in his movements. He carried the reputation, among the foreign
residents, of knowing more about Italian politics than the premier
himself; and he further carried the reputation--whether deserved or
not--of mixing rather more deeply than was wise in the dark
undercurrent of the government.

And this particular spring the undercurrent was unusually dark and
dangerously swift. Young Italy had been sowing wild oats, and the crop
was ripening fast. It was a period of anxiety and disappointment for
those who had watched the country's brave struggle for unity and
independence thirty years before. Victor Emmanuel, Cavour, and
Garibaldi had passed away; the patriots had retired and the politicians
had come in. A long period of over-speculation, of dishonesty and
incompetence, of wild building schemes and crushing taxes, had brought
the country's credit to the lowest possible ebb. A series of
disgraceful bank scandals, involving men highest in the government, had
shaken the confidence of the people. The failure of the Italian colony
in Africa, and the heart-rending campaign against King Menelik and his
dervishes, with thousands of wounded conscripts sent back to their
homes, had carried the discontent to every corner of the kingdom. And
fast on the heels of this disaster had come a failure in the wheat
crop, with all its attendant horrors; while simultaneously the corner
in the American market was forcing up the price of foreign wheat to
twice its normal value.

It was a time when priests were recalling to the peasants the wrongs
the church had suffered; a time when the socialist presses were turning
out pamphlets containing plain truths plainly stated; a time when
investors refused to invest in government bonds, and even Italian
statesmen were beginning to look grave.

To the casual eyes of tourists the country was still as picturesquely,
raggedly gay as ever. There were perhaps more beggars on the church
steps, and their appeal for bread was a trifle more insistent; but for
people interested only in Italy's galleries and ruins and shops the
changes were not marked. But those who did understand, who cared for
the future of the nation, who saw the seething below the surface, were
passing through a phase of disillusionment and doubt. And Laurence
Sybert was one who both understood and cared. He saw the direction in
which the country was drifting even better perhaps than the Italians
themselves. He looked on in a detached, more remote fashion, not so
swept by the current as those who were in the stream. But if he were
detached in fact--by accident of his American parentage and
citizenship--in feelings he was with the Italians heart and soul.

The consul-general remained some minutes silently studying the younger
man's expressive back--irritation, obstinacy, something stronger,
appeared in every line of his squared shoulders--then he rose and
walked across to the window.

'See here, Sybert,' he said bluntly, 'I'm your friend, and I don't want
to see you doing anything foolish. I know where your sympathies are;
and if the rest of us looked into the matter with our eyes open, it's
possible ours would be on the same side. But that's neither here nor
there; we couldn't do any good, and you can't, either. You must think
of your own position--you are secretary of the American Embassy and
nephew of the ambassador. In common decency it won't do to exhibit too
much sympathy with the enemies of the Italian government. You say
yourself that you don't want to see a revolution. Then it's your duty,
in the interests of law and order, to do all you can to suppress it.'

'Oh, I'm willing to do all I can toward relieving the suffering and
quieting the people; but when it comes to playing the police spy and
getting these poor devils jailed for twenty years because they've
shouted, "Down with Savoy!" I refuse.'

Melville shrugged. 'That part of the business can be left to the secret
police; they're capable of handling it.'

'I don't doubt that,' Sybert growled.

'Your business is merely to aid in pacifying the people and to raise
subscriptions for buying food. You are in with the wealthy foreigners,
and can get money out of them easier than most.'

'I suppose that means I am to bleed Copley?'

'I dare say he'll be willing enough to give; it's in his line. Of
course he's a friend, and I don't like to say anything. I know he had
nothing to do with getting up the wheat deal; but it's all in the
family, and he won't lose by it. The corner is playing the deuce with
Italy, and it's his place to help a bit.'

'What is playing the deuce with Italy is an extravagant government and
crushing taxes and dead industries. The wheat famine is bad enough; but
that isn't the main trouble, and you know it as well as I do.'

'The main trouble,' his companion broke in sharply, 'is the fact that
the priests and the anarchists and the socialists and every other sort
of meddling malcontent keep things so stirred up that the government is
forced into the stand it takes.'

Sybert whirled around from the window and faced him with black brows
and a sudden flaring of passion in his eyes. He opened his mouth to
speak, and then controlled himself and went on in a quiet,
half-sneering tone--

'I suppose the socialists and priests and the rest of your malcontents
forced our late premier into office and kept him there. I suppose they
yoked Italy with the Triple Alliance and drove the soldiers into
Abyssinia to be butchered like hogs. I suppose they were at the bottom
of the bank scandals, and put the charity money into official pockets,
and let fifteen thousand peasants go mad with hunger last year--fifteen
thousand!----' His voice suddenly broke, and he half-turned away. 'Good
Lord, Melville, the poverty in Italy is something appalling!'

'Yes, I dare say it is--but, just the same, that's only one side of the
question. The country is new, and you can't expect it to develop along
every line at once. The government has committed some very natural
blunders, but at the same time it has accomplished a vast amount of
good. It has united a lot of chaotic states, with different traditions
and different aims, into one organic whole; it has built up a modern
nation, with all the machinery of modern civilization, in an
incalculably short time. Of course the people have had to pay for it
with a good many deprivations--in every great political change there
are those who suffer; it's inevitable. But the suffering is only
temporary, and the good is permanent. You've been keeping your eyes so
closely on passing events that you're in danger of losing your
perspective.'

Sybert shrugged his shoulders, with a quick resumption of his usual
indifference.

'We've had twenty-five years of United Italy, and what has it
accomplished?' he demanded. 'It's built up one of the finest standing
armies in Europe, if you like; a lot of railroads it didn't need; some
aqueducts and water-works, and a postal and telegraph system. It has
erected any number of gigantic public buildings, of theatres and
arcades and statues of Victor Emmanuel II; but what has it done for the
poor people beyond taxing them to pay for these things? What has it
done for Sicily and Sardinia, for the pellagra victims of the north,
for the half-starved peasants of the Agra Romana? Why does Sicily hold
the primacy of crime in Europe; why has emigration reached two hundred
thousand a year? Parliament votes five million lire for a palace of
justice, and lets a man be murdered in prison by his keepers without
the show of a trial. The government supports plenty of universities for
the sons of the rich, but where are the elementary schools for the
peasants? Certainly Italy's a Great Power--if that's all you want--and
her people can take their choice between emigrating and starving.'

'Yes, it's bad, I know; but that it's quite as bad as you would have us
believe, I doubt. You're a pessimist by conviction, Sybert. You won't
look at the silver linings.'

'The silver linings are pretty thin,' he retorted. 'Italian politics
have changed since the days of Victor Emmanuel and Cavour.'

'That's only natural. You could scarcely expect any nation to keep up
such a high pitch of patriotism as went to the making of United
Italy--the country's settled down a bit, but the elements of strength
are still there.'

'The country's settled down a good bit,' he agreed. 'Oh, yes, I believe
myself--at least I hope--that it's only a passing phase. The Italian
people have too much inherent strength to allow themselves to be
mastered long by corrupt politicians. But that the country is in pretty
low water now, and that the breakers are not far ahead, no one with his
eyes open can doubt. The parliament is wasteful and senseless and
dishonest, the taxes are crushing, the public debt is enormous, the
currency is debased. If such a government can't take care of itself, I
don't see that it's the business of foreigners to help it.'

'That is just the point, Sybert. The government can take care of itself
and it will. The foreigners, out of common humanity, ought to help the
people as much as they can.'

Sybert appeared to study Melville's face for a few moments; then he
dropped his eyes and examined the floor.

'This is a time for those in power to choose their way very carefully.
There are a good many discontented people, and the government is going
to have more of a pull than you think to hold its own--there's
revolution in the air.'

Melville faced him squarely.

'For goodness' sake, Sybert, I don't know how much influence you have,
or anything about it, but do what you can to keep things quiet. Of
course the government has made mistakes--as what government has not?
But until there's something better to be substituted there's no use
kicking. Plainly, the people are too ignorant to govern themselves, and
the House of Savoy is the only means of salvation.'

Sybert waved his hand impatiently.

'I haven't been trying to undermine the government, I assure you. I
know well enough that for a good many years to come Italy won't have
anything better to offer, and all my influence with the Italians--which
naturally isn't much--has been advice of the same nature. I know very
well that if any radical change were attempted, only anarchy would
result; so I counsel these poor starving beggars "patience" like a
skulking coward.'

'Very well; I don't see then why you have any objection to keeping on
with your counsel, and at the same time give them something to eat.'

'It's the looks of the thing--standing up openly on the side of the
authorities when I'm not with them in sympathy.'

'It's a long sight better for a person in your position than standing
up openly against the authorities.'

'Oh, as for that, I'm thinking of resigning from the legation, and then
I'll be free to do as I please.'

Melville laid his hand on the younger man's shoulder.

'Sybert, you may resign from the legation, but you're still your
uncle's nephew. You can't resign from that. Whatever you did would cast
discredit on him. He's an old man, and he's fond of you. Don't be a
fool. An American has no business mixing up in these Italian broils;
Italy must work out her own salvation without the help of foreigners.
Garibaldi was right--"_Italia fara da se_."'

'"_Italia fara da se_,"' he repeated. 'I suppose it's true enough.
Italy must in the end do for herself, and no outsider can be of any
help--but I shall at least have tried.'

'My dear fellow, if you will let me speak plainly, the best thing you
can do for yourself and your family, for America and Italy, is, as you
say, to resign from the legation--and go home.'

'Go home!' Sybert raised his head, with a little laugh, but with a
flash underneath of the real self which he kept so carefully hidden
from the world. 'I was born in Italy; I was brought up here, just as
little Gerald Copley is being brought up. I have lived here all my
life, except for half a dozen years or so while I was being educated.
All my interests, all my sympathies, are in Italy, and you ask me to
_go home_! I have no other home to go to. If you take Italy away from
me, I'm a man without a country.'

'I'm in earnest, Sybert. Whether you like it or not, you're an
American, and you can't get away from it if you live here a hundred
years. You may talk Italian and look Italian, but you cannot _be_
Italian. A man's nationality lies deeper than all externals. You're an
American through and through, and it's a pity you can't be a little
proud of the fact. The only way in which there's going to be any
progress in the world for a good long time to come is for Italians to
care for Italy and Americans for America. We aren't ready just yet to
do away with national boundaries; and if we were, we should run up
against racial boundaries, which are still more unchangeable. America
is quite as good a country to care about as Italy--there are some who
think it's better; it depends on the point of view.'

'Oh, that's true enough,' Sybert returned, with a short laugh.
'Everything in the world depends on one's point of view; the worst
place is all right if you only choose to think so. I dare say hell
would be pleasurable enough to a salamander, but the point is--I'm not
a salamander.'

Melville shrugged his shoulders helplessly and turned back to his seat.

'There's no use arguing with you, I know that. You're wasting your
ability where it isn't appreciated, but I suppose it's nobody's
business but your own. Some day you'll see the truth yourself; and I
hope it won't be too late. But now as to this committee business--for
your uncle's sake you ought to carry it through. I will tell you
frankly--I imagine it isn't news--that the Italian government has its
eye on you; and if you manage to get yourself arrested, rightly or
wrongly, for stirring up sedition, it will make an ugly story in the
papers. The editor and staff of the _Grido del Popolo_ were arrested
this morning. The police are opening telegrams and letters and watching
suspicious persons. You'd better step carefully.'

Sybert laughed, with a gesture of dissent. 'There's no danger about me.
The enthusiastic head of the Foreign Relief Committee is safe from
government persecution.'

'You'll act then?'

'Oh, I don't know--I'll think it over. It's a deuced hole to have got
into; though I suppose it is, as you say, about the only way to help.
No doubt I can raise money and distribute bread as well as another.'

'Appoint Copley on a sub-committee. He'll be glad to give.'

'I don't like to ask him. He doesn't go in for alms; he's all for
future--though in a time like this----'

'In a time like this we're all willing to step aside a bit. I'm glad
you've decided to work on the side of the government. It is, as things
stand, the only sensible thing to do.'

'I haven't decided yet. And I do not, as I told you before, care a rap
what becomes of the government. It's the people I'm helping.'

'It amounts to the same thing.'

'Not in Italy.'

'Oh, very well. You're incorrigible. At least keep your opinions to
yourself.'

'I'm not likely to shout them abroad under the present regime. And as
to this infernal committee--oh, well, I'll think about it.'

'Very well; think favourably. It's the only way to help, remember--and
very good policy into the bargain. Some day, my boy, maybe you'll grow
sensible. Good-bye.'

Sybert paced up and down the room for five or ten minutes after
Melville had left, and then picked up his hat and started out again.
Turning toward the Piazza Barberini, he strode along, scowling
unconsciously at the passers-by. He bowed mechanically to the people
who bowed to him. Along the Corso he met the procession of carriages
going toward the Pincio. Ladies nodded graciously; they even
half-turned to look after him. But he was quite unaware of it; his
thoughts were not with the portion of Roman society which rode in
carriages. He traversed the Corso and plunged into the tangle of more
or less dirty streets on the left bank of the Tiber. Here the crowds
who elbowed their way along the narrow sidewalks were more poorly
dressed. After some twenty minutes' walking he turned into a narrow
street in the region of the grimy ruins of the theatre of Marcellus,
and paused before the doorway of a wine-shop which bore upon its front
the ambitious title, _'Osteria del Popolo Italiano_--Tarquinio
Paterno.' With a barely perceptible glance over his shoulder, he
stepped into the dingy little cafe which opened from the street. The
front room, with its square wooden tables and stiff-backed chairs, was
empty, except for Madame Tarquinio Paterno, who was sweeping the floor.
Sybert nodded to her, and crossing the room to the rear door, which
opened into the _cucina_, knocked twice. The door opened a crack for
purposes of examination, and then was thrown wide to admit him.

The room which was revealed was a stone-walled kitchen, lighted in the
rear by a small-paned window opening on to a gloomy court-yard.
'Lighted' is scarcely the word to use, for between the dirt on the
panes and the dimness of the court, very little daylight struggled in.
But the interior was not dreary. A charcoal fire blazing on the high
stone hearth shot up fiercely every now and then, throwing grotesque
high lights on the faces of the men grouped about the room.

Sybert paused on the threshold and glanced about from face to face.
Three or four men were sitting on low benches about a long table,
drinking wine and talking. The one who was in the act of speaking as
Sybert appeared in the door paused with his mouth still open. The
others, recognizing him, however, called out a cordial '_Buona sera_,
Signor Siberti,' while Tarquinio hastened to place a chair and bring a
tall rush-covered flask of red Frascati wine. Sybert returned their
salutations, and sat down with a glance of inquiry at the excited
stranger. Tarquinio ceremoniously presented him as Girolamo Mendamo of
Naples, and he ended his introduction with the assurance, 'Have no
fear; he is a good fellow and one of us,' and left it to be conjectured
as to whether the compliment referred to Sybert or the Neapolitan. The
latter took it to refer to Sybert, and after a momentary hesitation
picked up his discourse where he had dropped it.

'Ah, and when the poor fishermen are sickening for a little salt and
try to get it from the sea water without paying, what do the police do?
They throw them into prison. The Camorra used to protect people from
the police, but now the Camorra no longer dares to lift its head and
the people have no protectors. It used to be that when the police
wanted more money it satisfied them to raise the taxes, but now they
must raise the price of bread and macaroni as well.'

He had commenced in a low tone, but as he proceeded his voice rose
higher and higher.

'And last week a great crowd broke open the bakeries and carried off
the flour, and the police were frightened and put down the price--but
not enough. Then the people threatened again, and _ecco!_ all the tax
was taken off. That is the way to deal with the police; they are
cowards, and it is only fear that makes them just.'

The man laughed hoarsely and looked around for approval. The others
nodded.

'_Gia_, he speaks the truth. It is only fear that makes them just.'

'They are cowards--cowards,' repeated the Neapolitan. 'If all the
people in every city of Italy would do the same, there would soon be no
more taxes and no more police.'

'I am afraid that you are mistaken there, my friend,' Sybert broke in.
'There will always be taxes and always be police. But it's true, as you
say, that the taxes are too heavy and the police are unjust. The time
hasn't come, though, when you can gain anything by rioting and
revolutions. The government's backed by the army, and it's too strong
for you. You may possibly frighten it into lowering the wheat tax for a
time, but it will be at a mighty heavy cost to the ones who are found
out.'

'Who are you?' the man demanded suspiciously.

'I am an American who would like to see Italy as happy and prosperous
and well governed as the United States.' Sybert smiled inwardly at the
ideal he was holding up.

'Ah--you're a spy!' the man cried, with a quick scowl.

'I am so far from being a spy that I have come to warn you that, if you
don't want to spend the next few years of your lives in prison, you
must be very careful to cheer the House of Savoy on the first of May.
The police spies are keeping both eyes open just now.'

The others nodded their heads pacifically, but the Neapolitan still
scowled. He suddenly leaned forward across the table and scanned Sybert
with eyes that glittered fiercely in the firelight. Then he burst out
again in low guttural tones--

'It is easy for you to talk, Signor Whatever-your-name-is. You have
bread to eat. But if you worked all day from sunrise to sunset--worked
until you grew so tired you couldn't sleep, and then got up and worked
again--and then if the police came and took away all the money in taxes
and didn't even leave enough to buy your family food, and the work gave
out so you must either steal or die, and you couldn't find anything to
steal--then you would sing another song. Wait, wait, you say. It's
always wait. Will better times ever come if we sit down and wait for
them? Who will give us the better times? The King, perhaps? Umberto?'

The man broke off with a harsh laugh.

'Ah--we shall die waiting, and our children after us. And when we are
dead the good God will keep us waiting outside of paradise because
there is no money to pay for masses. No one cares for those who do not
care for themselves. It's the poor people, who haven't enough to eat,
who buy the gold braid on the King's clothes and pay for the carriages
of his ministers. In my opinion, we would do better to buy bread for
our children first.'

Sybert looked back in the man's burning face, and his own caught fire.
He knew that every word he said was true, and he knew how hopeless was
his remedy. What could these passionate, ignorant peasants, blazing
with rage, do with power if they had it? Worse than nothing. Their own
condition would only be rendered more desperate than ever. He glanced
about the table from one face to another. They were all leaning
forward, waiting for his answer. The fierce eagerness in their eyes was
contagious. A sudden wave of hopeless pity for them swept him off his
feet, and for a moment he lost himself.

'My God! men,' he burst out, 'I know it's true. I know you're starving
while others spend your money. There's no justice for you, and there
never will be. The only thing I want in the world is to see Italy
happy. I am as ready to die for it as you are, but what can I do? What
can any one do? The soldiers are stronger than we are, and if we raise
our hands they will shoot us down like dogs, and there it will end.' He
paused with a deep breath, and went on in a quieter tone. 'Patience is
poor food to offer to starving men, but it's the one hope now for you
and for Italy. The only thing you can do is to go to the polls and vote
for honest ministers.'

'Ministers are all alike,' said one.

'And who will feed us while we are waiting for election day?' asked
another, who had been listening silently.

The question was unanswerable, and Sybert sat frowning down at the
table without speaking. The Neapolitan presently broke in again. There
was something electric about his words and the force behind them. Every
one bent forward to listen.

'Who is the King?' he demanded. 'He is only a man. So am I a man. Then
what makes him so different from me? They may shoot me down if they
like, but first I have work to do. The King shall know me before I die.
And he is not all,' he added darkly. 'Do you know why the wheat's so
scarce? Because of a _forestiere_ here in Rome--Signor Copli--he that
put down the Camorra in Naples and throws the beggars into prison.'

An angry mutter ran around the room.

'You're mistaken there,' Sybert interrupted. 'It's not this Signor
Copli who bought the wheat; it's his brother in America. This Signor
Copli is the friend of the poor people. Many, many thousand lire he
gives away every year, and no one knows about it.'

A more friendly murmur arose, but the Neapolitan was still unconvinced.

'It is the same Signor Copli,' he affirmed stubbornly. 'He hides the
wheat in America, where he thinks no one will know about it. And then,
after stealing it all from the mouths of the poor, he gives a little
back with a great show, thinking to blind us. But we know. The _Grido
del Popolo_ printed it out in black and white for all who can to read.'

'And the _Grido del Popolo_ was stopped this morning and the editor put
in jail for printing lies,' said Sybert sharply.

'Ah, you're a police spy! You pretend to be for us to make us talk.'
His hand half instinctively went to his belt.

Sybert rose to his feet and dropped his hand roughly on the man's
shoulder. 'The best thing you can do for your country is to put that
stiletto into the fire.' He turned aside with an expression of disgust
and tossed some silver coins on the table in payment for the wine. Then
pausing a moment, he glanced about the circle of swarthy faces.
Gradually his expression softened. 'I've tried to warn you. The police
are on the watch, and I should advise you to stick pretty closely to
your homes and not mix up in any riots. I will do what I can to get
food and money for the poor people--I know of no other way to help.
Heaven knows I would do it if I could!'

He nodded to them, and motioning Tarquinio to follow, passed into the
front room. Closing the door behind them, he turned to the innkeeper.

'Tarquinio, I think you had better go up into the hills and attend to
your vineyard for a few weeks.'

The young Italian's face was the picture of dismay. 'But the _osteria_,
Signor Siberti; who will manage that?'

'Your wife can look after it. Let it be given out that you are tending
vines in the Sabine hills. That is the safest profession these days.
The police will be paying you a visit before long if I am not greatly
mistaken--and whatever you do, keep out fellows like that Neapolitan.'

Tarquinio's face darkened with a quick look of suspicion. 'I am but a
poor innkeeper, Signor Siberti. I must welcome those who come.'

Sybert shrugged. 'I was merely speaking for your own safety. Such
guests are dangerous. _Addio._' He turned toward the door, and then
turned back a moment. 'Take my advice, Tarquinio, and visit your
vineyard.'

Tarquinio followed him to the threshold, and bidding him a voluble
good-bye in the face of the world, begged the signor Americano to
honour his humble _osteria_ again; so that any chance passer-by might
regard the gentleman as but a casual visitor. Sybert smiled at the
simple strategy. An Italian loves a plot better than his dinner, and is
never happier than when engaged in an imaginary intrigue. But in this
case it occurred to him that his host's caution might not be out of
place; and he fervently assured Tarquinio that the wine had been
excellent, and that in the future he would send his friends to the
_Osteria del Popolo Italiano_.




                               CHAPTER IX


SYBERT turned away from the wine-shop with a half-laugh at Tarquinio's
little play, with a half-frown at the fierce words of the Neapolitan,
which were still ringing in his head. He walked along with his eyes
upon the ground, scarcely aware of his surroundings, until an excited
medley of voices close at hand suddenly startled him from his thoughts.
He glanced up for a moment with unseeing eyes, and then with an
astonished flash of recognition as he beheld Marcia Copley backed
against one of the dark stone arches in the substructure of the theatre
of Marcellus. Her head was thrown back and there were two angry red
spots in her cheeks, while a struggling crowd of boys pressed around
her with shouts and gesticulations.

As he paused to take in the meaning of the scene, he heard
Marcia--evidently so angry that she had forgotten her Italian--say in
English: 'You beastly little cowards! You wouldn't dare hurt anything
but a poor animal that can't hit back.' She accompanied this speech
with a vigorous shake to a small boy whom she held by the shoulder. The
boy could not understand her words, but he did understand her action
and he kicked back vigorously. The crowd laughed and began to close
around her. She took out her purse. 'Who owns this dog?' she demanded.
At sight of the money they pressed closer, and in another moment would
have snatched it away; but Sybert stepped forward, and raising his
cane, scattered them right and left.

'What in the world are you doing here? What is the meaning of this?' he
asked.

'Oh, Mr. Sybert! I'm so glad to see you. Look! those horrible little
wretches were killing this dog.'

Sybert glanced down at her feet, where a bedraggled cur was crouching,
shivering, and looking up with pleading eyes. The blood was running
from a cut on its shoulder, and a motley assortment of tin was tied to
its tail by a cord. He took out his knife and cut the dog loose, and
Marcia stooped and picked it up.

'Take care, Miss Marcia,' he said in a disgusted tone. 'He's very
dirty, and you will get covered with blood.'

Marcia put her handkerchief over the dog's wound, and it lay in her
arms, whimpering and shaking.

'What is the meaning of this?' he demanded again, almost roughly. 'What
are you doing in this part of the city alone?'

His tone at another time would have been irritating, but just now she
was too grateful for his appearance to be anything but cordial, and she
hastily explained--

'I've been spending the afternoon at Tre Fontane with some friends. I
left them at the English cemetery, and was just driving back to the
station when I saw those miserable little boys chasing this dog. I
jumped out and grabbed him, and they all followed me.'

'I see,' said Sybert; 'and it is fortunate that I happened by when I
did, or you wouldn't have had any money left to pay your cab-driver.
These Roman urchins have not the perfect manners one could wish.'

'Manners!' Marcia sniffed indignantly. 'I loathe the Italians! I think
they are the cruellest people I ever saw. Those boys were stoning this
poor dog to death.'

'I dare say they have not enjoyed your advantages.'

'They would have killed him if I hadn't come just when I did.'

'You are not going out to the villa alone?'

'No; Aunt Katherine and Gerald are going to meet me at the station.'

'Oh, very well,' he answered in a tone of evident relief, as they
turned toward the waiting carriage. 'Let me take the dog and I will
drop him a few streets farther on, where the boys won't find him again.'

'Certainly not,' said Marcia indignantly. 'Some other boys would find
him. I shall take him home and feed him. He doesn't look as if he had
had anything to eat for weeks.'

'In that case,' said Sybert resignedly, 'I will drive to the station
with you, for he is scarcely a lap-dog and you may have trouble getting
him into the train.' And while she was in the midst of her remonstrance
he stepped into the carriage and put the dog on the floor between his
feet. The dog, however, did not favour the change, and stretching up an
appealing paw he touched Marcia's knee, with a whine.

'You poor thing! Stop trembling. Nobody's going to hurt you,' and she
bent over and kissed him on the nose.

Marcia was excited. She had not quite recovered her equanimity since
the scene with Paul Dessart in the cloisters, and the affair of the dog
had upset her afresh. She rattled on now, with a gaiety quite at
variance with her usual attitude toward Sybert, of anything and
everything that came into her mind--Gerald's broken tooth, the
departure of Marietta, the afternoon at Tre Fontane, and the episode of
the dog. Sybert listened politely, but his thoughts were not upon her
words.

He was too full of what he had left behind in the little cafe for him
to listen patiently to Marcia's chatter. As he looked at her, flushed
and smiling in her dainty clothes, which were faultless with the
faultlessness that comes from money, he experienced a feeling almost of
anger against her. He longed to face her with a few plain truths. What
right had she to all her useless luxuries, when her father was--as the
Neapolitan had truly put it--taking his money from the mouths of the
poor? It was their work which made it possible for such as she to
live--and was she worth it? The world had given her much: she was
educated, she was cultured, she had trained tastes and sensibilities,
and in return what did she do for the world? She saved a dog. He made a
movement of disgust and for a moment he almost obeyed his impulse to
throw the dog out. But he brought himself back to reason with a
half-laugh. It was not her fault. She knew nothing of her father's
transaction; she knew nothing of Italy's need. There was no reason why
she should not be happy. And, after all, he told himself wearily, it
was a relief to meet some one who had no troubles.

Marcia suddenly interrupted her own light discourse to look at her
watch. 'Gracious! I haven't much time. Will you please tell him to
hurry a little, Mr. Sybert?'

The driver obeyed by giving his horse a resounding cut with the whip,
whereupon Marcia jerked him by the coat-tails and told him that if he
whipped his horse again she would not give him any _mancia_.

The fellow shrugged his shoulders and they settled down into a walk.

'Isn't there any society for the prevention of cruelty to animals?' she
asked. 'These Italians are hopeless.'

'You can scarcely expect them to expend more consideration on animals
than they receive themselves,' Sybert threw off.

'Oh, dear!' she complained anew, suddenly becoming aware of their pace;
'I'm afraid we'll be late for the train. Don't you suppose he could
hurry just a little without whipping the horse?'

Sybert translated her wishes to the driver again, and they jogged on at
a somewhat livelier rate; but by the time they reached the station the
train had gone, and there were no Mrs. Copley and Gerald in the
waiting-room. Marcia's face was slightly blank as she realized the
situation, and her first involuntary thought was a wish that it had
been Paul Dessart instead of Sybert who had come with her. She carried
off the matter with a laugh, however, and explained to her companion--

'I suppose Aunt Katherine thought I had decided to stay in the city
with the Roystons. I told her I was going to, but I found they had a
dinner engagement. It doesn't matter, though; I'll wait here for the
next train. There is one for Palestrina before very long--Aunt
Katherine went by way of Tivoli. Thank you very much, Mr. Sybert, for
coming to the station with me, and really you mustn't think you have to
wait until the train goes. The dog will be company enough.'

Sybert consulted his time schedule in silence. 'The next train doesn't
leave till seven, and there won't be any carriage waiting for you. How
do you propose to get out to the villa?'

'Oh, the station-man at Palestrina will find a carriage for me. There's
a very nice man who's often driven us out.'

Sybert frowned slightly as he considered the question. It was rather
inconvenient for him to go out to the villa that night; but he
reflected that it was his duty toward Copley to get his niece back
safely--as to letting her set out alone on a seven-mile drive with a
strange Palestrina driver, that was clearly out of the question.

'I think I'll run out with you,' he said, looking at his watch.

She had seen his frown and feared some such proposition. 'No, indeed!'
she cried. 'I shouldn't think of letting you. I've been over the same
road hundreds of times, and I'm not in the least afraid. It won't be
late.'

'The Sabine mountains are infested with bandits,' he declared. 'I think
you need an escort.'

'Mr. Sybert, how silly! I know your time is precious, (this was
intended for irony, but as it happened to be true, he did not recognize
it as such), 'and I don't want you to come with me.'

Sybert laughed. 'I don't doubt that, Miss Marcia; but I'm coming, just
the same. I am sorry, but you will have to put up with me.'

'I should a lot rather you wouldn't,' she returned, 'but do as you
please.'

'Thank you for the invitation,' he smiled. 'There's about an hour and a
half before the train goes--you might run out to the Embassy and have a
cup of tea.'

'Thank you for the invitation, but I think I'll stay here. I don't wish
to miss a second train, and I shouldn't know what to do with the dog.'

'Very well, if you don't mind staying alone, I will drive out myself
and leave a business message for the chief, and then I can take a
vacation with a clear conscience. I have a matter to consult your uncle
about, and I shall be very glad to run out to the villa.' He raised his
hat in a sufficiently friendly bow and departed.

When he returned, an hour later, he found Marcia feeding the dog with
sausage amid an appreciative group of porters, one of whom had procured
the meat.

'Oh, dear!' she cried. 'I hoped Marcellus would have finished his meal
before you came back. But you aren't so particular about etiquette as
the contessa,' she added, 'and don't object to feeding dogs in the
station?'

'I dare say the poor beast was hungry.'

'Hungry! I had a whole kilo of sausage, and you should have seen it
disappear.'

'These _facchini_ look as if they would not be averse to sharing his
meal.'

'Poor fellows, they do look hungry.' Marcia produced her purse and
handed them a lira apiece. 'Because I haven't any luggage for you to
carry, and because you like my dog,' she explained in Italian. 'Don't
tell Uncle Howard,' she added in English. 'I don't believe one lira can
make them paupers.'

'It would doubtless be difficult to pauperize them any more than they
are at present,' he agreed.

'You don't believe in Uncle Howard's ideas of charity, do you?' she
inquired tentatively.

'Oh, not entirely; but we don't quarrel over it.--Perhaps,' he
suggested, 'we'd better go out and find an empty compartment while the
guards are not looking. I fear they might object to Marcellus--is that
his name?--occupying a first-class carriage.'

'Marcellus, because I found him by the theatre.'

'Ah--I hope he will turn out as handsome a fellow as his namesake.
Come, Marcellus; it's time we were off.'

He picked the dog up by the nape of the neck and they started down the
platform, looking for an empty carriage. They had their choice of a
number; the train was not crowded, and first-class carriages in an
Italian way-train are rarely in demand. As he was helping Marcia into
the car, Sybert was amused to see Tarquinio, the proprietor of the Inn
of the Italian People, hurrying into a third-class compartment, with a
furtive glance over his shoulder as if he expected every corner to be
an ambuscade of the secret police. The warning had evidently fallen on
good ground, and the poor fellow was fleeing for his life from the
wicked machinations of an omniscient premier.

'If you will excuse me a moment, I wish to speak to a friend,' Sybert
said as he got Marcia settled; and without waiting for her answer, he
strode off down the platform.

She had seen the young Italian, weighed down by a bundle tied up in a
bed-quilt, give a glance of recognition as he passed them; and as she
watched Sybert enter a third-class compartment she had not a doubt but
that the Italian was the 'friend' he was searching. She leaned back in
the corner with a puzzled frown. Why had Sybert so many queer friends
in so many queer places, and why need he be so silent about them?




                               CHAPTER X


SYBERT presently returned and dropped into the seat opposite Marcia;
the guard slammed the door and the train pulled slowly out into the
Campagna. They were both occupied with their own thoughts, and as
neither found much pleasure in talking to the other, and both knew it,
they made little pretence at conversation.

Marcia's excited mood had passed, and she leaned forward with her chin
in her hand, watching rather pensively the soft Roman twilight as it
crept over the Campagna. What she really saw, however, was the sunlit
cloister of St. Paul Without the Walls and Paul Dessart's face as he
talked to her. Was she really in love with him, she asked herself, or
was it just--Italy? She did not know and she did not want to think. It
was so much pleasanter merely to drift, and so very difficult to make
up one's mind. Everything had been so care-free before, why must he
bring the question to an issue? It was a question she did not wish to
decide for a long, long time. Would he be willing to wait--to wait for
an indefinite future that in the end might never come? Patience was not
Paul's way. Suppose he refused to drift; suppose he insisted on his
answer now--did she wish to give him up? No; quite frankly, she did
not. She pictured him as he stood there in the cloister, with the warm
sunlight and shadow playing about him, with his laughing, boyish face
for the instant sober, his eager, insistent eyes bent upon her, his
words for once stammering and halting. He was very attractive, very
convincing; and yet she sighed. Life for her was still in the future.
The world was new and full and varied, and experience was beckoning.
There were many things to see and do, and she wanted to be free.

The short southern twilight faded quickly and a full moon took its
place in a cloudless turquoise sky. The light flooded the dim
compartment with a shimmering brilliancy, and outside it was almost
dazzling in its glowing whiteness. Marcia leaned against the window,
gazing out at the rolling plain. The tall arches of Aqua Felice were
silhouetted darkly against the sky, and in the distance the horizon was
broken by the misty outline of the Sabine hills. Now and then they
passed a lonely group of farm-buildings set in a cluster of eucalyptus
trees, planted against the fever; but for the most part the scene was
barren and desolate, with scarcely a suggestion of actual, breathing
human light. On the Appian Way were visible the gaunt outlines of Latin
tombs, and occasionally the ruined remains of a mediaeval watch-tower.
The picture was almost too perfect in its beauty; it was like the
painted back drop for a spectacular play. Scarcely real, and yet one of
the oldest things in the world--the rolling Campagna, the arches of the
aqueducts, Rome behind and the Sabines before. So it had been for
centuries; thousands of human lives were wrapped up in it. That was its
charm. The picture was not inanimate, but pathetically human. As she
looked far off across the plain so mournfully beautiful in its
desolation, a sudden rush of feeling swept over her, a rush of that
insane love of Italy which has engulfed so many foreigners in the
waters of Lethe. She knew now how Paul felt. Italy! Italy! She loved it
too.

A half-sob rose in her throat and her eyes filled with tears. She
caught herself quickly and shrank back in the corner, with a glance at
the man across to see if he were watching her. He was not. He sat
rigid, looking out at the Campagna under half-shut eyelids. One hand
was plunged deep in his pocket and the other lay on the dog's head to
keep him quiet. Marcia noticed in surprise that while he appeared so
calm, his fingers opened and shut nervously. She glanced up into his
face again. He was staring at the picture before him as impassively as
at a blank wall; but his eyes seemed more deep-set than usual and the
under shadows darker. She half abstractedly fell to studying his face,
wondering what was behind those eyes; what he could be thinking of.

He suddenly looked up and caught her gaze.

'I beg your pardon?' he asked.

'I didn't say anything.'

'You looked as if you did,' he said with a slight laugh, and turned
away from the light. And now Marcia had the uncomfortable feeling that
from under his drooping lids he was watching her. She turned back to
the window again and tried to centre her attention on the shifting
scene outside, but she was oppressively conscious of her silent
companion. His face was in the shadow and she could not tell whether
his eyes were open or shut. She tried to think of something to talk
about, but no relevant subject presented itself. She experienced a
nervous sense of relief when the train finally stopped at Palestrina.

The station-man, after some delay, found them a carriage with a
reasonably rested-looking horse. As Sybert helped Marcia in he asked if
she would object to letting a poor fellow with an unbeautifully large
bundle sit on the front seat with the driver.

'We won't meet any one at this time of night,' he added. 'He's going to
Castel Vivalanti and it's a long walk.'

'Certainly he may ride,' Marcia returned. 'It makes no difference to me
whether we meet any one or not.'

'Oh, I beg your pardon,' Sybert smiled. 'I didn't mean to be
disagreeable. Some ladies would object, you know. Tarquinio,' he called
as the Italian with the bed-quilt shuffled past. 'The signorina invites
you to ride, since we are going the same way.'

Tarquinio thanked the signorina with Italian courtesy, boosted up his
bundle, and climbed up after it. Marcellus stretched himself
comfortably in the bottom of the carriage, and with a canine sigh of
content went peaceably to sleep. They set out between moonlit olive
orchards and vineyards with the familiar daytime details of
farm-buildings and ruins softened into a romantic beauty. Behind them
stretched the outline of the Alban mountains, the moonlight catching
the white walls of two twin villages which crowned the heights; and
before them rose the more desolate Sabines, standing fold upon fold
against the sky. It was for the most part a silent drive. Sybert at
first, aware that he was more silent than politeness permitted, made a
few casual attempts at conversation, and then with an apparently easy
conscience folded his arms and returned to his thoughts. Marcia, too,
had her thoughts, and the romance of the flower-scented moonlit night
gave them their direction. Had Paul been there to urge his case anew,
Italy would have helped in the pleading. But Paul had made a tiny
mistake that day--he had taken her at her word and let her go
alone--and the tiniest of mistakes is often big with consequences.

Once Sybert shifted his position and his hand accidentally touched
Marcia's on the seat between them. 'Pardon me,' he murmured, and folded
his arms again. She looked up at him quickly. The touch had run through
her like an electric shock. Who was this man? she asked herself
suddenly. What was he underneath? He seemed to be burning up inside;
and she had always considered him apathetic, indifferent. She looked at
him wide-eyed; she had never seen him like this. He reminded her of a
suppressed volcano that would burst out some day with a sudden
explosion. She again set herself covertly to studying his face. His
character seemed an anomaly; it contradicted itself. Was it good or
bad, simple or complex? Marcia did not have the key. She put together
all the things she knew of him, all the things she had heard--the
result was largely negative; the different pieces of evil cancelled
each other. She knew him in society--he was several different persons
there, but what was he when not in society? In his off hours? This
afternoon, for example. Why should he be so at home by the Theatre of
Marcellus? It was a long distance from the Embassy. And the man on the
front seat, who was he? She suddenly interrupted the silence with a
question. Sybert started at if he had forgotten she were there.

She repeated it: 'Is that man on the front seat Tarquinio Paterno who
keeps a little _trattoria_ in Rome?'

'Yes,' he returned, bringing a somewhat surprised gaze to rest upon
her. 'How do you come to know his name?'

'Oh, I just guessed. I know Domenico Paterno, the Castel Vivalanti
baker, and he told me about his son, Tarquinio. It's not such a very
common name; so when you said this man was going to the village, and
when I heard you call him Tarquinio, I thought--why were you
surprised?' she broke off. 'Is there anything more to know about him?'

'You seem to have his family history pretty straight,' Sybert shrugged.

They lapsed into silence again, and Marcia did not attempt to break it
a second time.

When they came to the turning where the steep road to Castel Vivalanti
branches off from the highway, the driver halted to let Tarquinio get
out. But Marcia remonstrated, that the bundle was too heavy for him to
carry up the hill, and she told the man to drive on up to the gates of
the town.

They jogged on up the winding ascent between orchards of olive and
almond trees fringed with the airy leafage of spring. Above them the
clustering houses of the village clung to the hilltop, tier above tier,
the jagged sky-line of roofs and towers cut out clearly against the
light.

Marcia had never visited Castel Vivalanti except in the unequivocal
glare of day, which shows the dilapidated little town in all its
dilapidation. But the moonlight changes all. The grey stone walls
stretched above them now like some grim fortress city of the middle
ages. And the old round tower, with its ruined drawbridge, looked as if
it had seen dark deeds and kept the secret. It was just such a
stronghold as the Cenci was murdered in.

They came to a stand before the tall arch of the Porta della Luna.
While Tarquinio was climbing down and hoisting the bundle to his
shoulder, Marcia's attention was momentarily attracted to a group of
boys quarrelling over a game of morro in the gateway.

Suddenly, in the midst of Tarquinio's expressions of thanks to the
signorina for helping a poor man on his journey, a frightened shriek
rang out in a child's high voice, followed by a succession of
long-drawn screams. The morro-players stopped their game and looked at
each other with startled eyes; and then, after a moment of hesitation,
went on with the play. At the first cry Sybert had leaped from the
carriage, and seizing one of the boys by the shoulder, he demanded the
cause.

The boy wriggled himself free with a gesture of unconcern.

'Gervasio Delano's mother is beating him. He always makes a great fuss
because he is afraid.'

'What is it?' Marcia cried as she sprang from the carriage and ran up
to Sybert.

'Some child's mother is beating him.'

The two, without waiting for any further explanations, turned in under
the gate and hurried along the narrow way to the left, in the direction
of the sounds. People had gathered in little groups in the doorways,
and were shaking their heads and talking excitedly. One woman, as she
caught sight of Marcia and Sybert, called out reassuringly that Teresa
wasn't hurting the boy; he always cried harder than he was struck.

By the time they had reached the low doorway whence the sounds issued,
the screams had died down to hysterical sobs. They plunged into the
room which opened from the street, and then paused. It was so dark that
for a moment they could not see anything. The only light came from a
flickering oil-lamp burning before an image of the Madonna. But as
their eyes became accustomed to the darkness they made out a stoutly
built peasant woman standing at one end of the room and grasping in her
hand an ox-goad such as the herdsmen on the Campagna use. For a moment
they thought she was the only person there, until a low sob proclaimed
the presence of a child who was crouching in the farthest corner.

'What do you want?' the woman asked, scowling angrily at the intruders.

'Have you been striking the child with that goad?' Sybert demanded.

'I strike the child with what I please,' the woman retorted. 'He is a
lazy good-for-nothing and he stole the soup.'

Marcia drew the little fellow from the corner where he was sobbing
steadily with long catches in his breath. His tears had gained such a
momentum that he could not stop, but he clung to her convulsively,
realizing that a deliverer of some sort was at hand. She turned him to
the light and revealed a great red welt across his cheek where one of
the blows had chanced to fall.

'It's outrageous! The woman ought to be arrested!' said Marcia, angrily.

Sybert took the lamp from the wall and bent over to look at him.

'Poor little devil! He looks as if he needed soup,' he muttered.

The woman broke in shrilly again to say that he was eleven years old
and never brought in a single soldo. She slaved night and day to keep
him fed, and she had children enough of her own to give to.

'Whose child is he?' Sybert demanded.

'He was my husband's,' the woman returned; 'and that husband is dead
and I have a new one. The boy is in the way. I can't be expected to
support him forever. It is time he was earning something for himself.'

Marcia sat down on a low stool and drew the boy to her.

'What can we do?' she asked, looking helplessly at Sybert. 'It won't do
to leave him here. She would simply beat him to death as soon as our
backs are turned.'

'I'm afraid she would,' he acknowledged. 'Of course I can threaten her
with the police, but I don't believe it will do much good.' He was
thinking that she might better adopt the boy than the dog, but he did
not care to put his thoughts into words.

'I know!' she exclaimed as if in answer to his unspoken suggestion;
'I'll take him home for an errand-boy. He will be very useful about the
place. Tell the woman, please, that I'm going to keep him, and make her
understand that she has nothing to do with him any more.'

'Would Mrs. Copley like to have him at the villa?' Sybert inquired
doubtfully. 'It's hardly fair----'

'Oh, yes. She won't mind if I insist--and I shall insist. Tell the
woman, please.'

Sybert told the woman rather curtly that she need not be at the expense
of feeding the boy any longer, the signorina would take him home to run
errands.

The woman quickly changed her manner at this, and refused to part with
him. Since she had cared for him when he was little, it was time for
him to repay the debt now that she was growing old.

Sybert succinctly explained that she had forfeited all right to the
child, and that if she made any trouble he would tell the police, who,
he added parenthetically, were his dearest friends. Without further
parleying, he picked up the boy and they walked out of the house,
followed on the woman's part by angry prayers that 'apoplexies' might
fall upon them and their descendants.

Curious groups of people had gathered outside the house, and they
separated silently to let them pass. At the gateway the morro-players
stopped their game to crowd around the carriage with shrill inquiries
as to what was going to be done with Gervasio. The driver leaned from
his seat and stared in stupid bewilderment at this rapid change of
fares. But he whipped up his horse and started with dispatch,
apparently moved by the belief that if he gave them time enough they
would invite all Castel Vivalanti to drive.

As they rattled down the hill Sybert broke out into an amused laugh. 'I
fear your aunt won't thank us, Miss Marcia, for turning Villa Vivalanti
into a foundling-asylum.'

'She won't care when we tell her about it,' said Marcia, comfortably.
She glanced down at the thin little face resting on Sybert's shoulder.
'Poor little fellow! He looks hungrier than Marcellus. The woman said
he was eleven, and he's scarcely bigger than Gerald.'

Sybert closed his fingers around Gervasio's tiny brown wrist. 'He's
pretty thin,' he remarked; 'but that can soon be remedied. These
peasant children are hardy little things when they have half a chance.'
He looked down at the boy, who was watching their faces with wide-open,
excited eyes, half frightened at the strange language. 'You mustn't be
afraid, Gervasio,' he reassured him in Italian. 'The signorina is
taking you home with her to Villa Vivalanti, where you won't be whipped
any more and will have all you want to eat. You must be a good boy and
do everything she tells you.'

Gervasio's eyes opened still wider. 'Will the signorina give me
chocolate?' he asked.

'He's one of the children I gave chocolate to, and he remembers it!'
Marcia said delightedly. 'I thought his face was familiar. Yes,
Gervasio,' she added in her very careful Italian. 'I will give you
chocolate if you always do what you are told, but not every day,
because chocolate is not good for little boys. You must eat bread and
meat and soup, and grow big and strong like--like Signor Siberti here.'

Sybert laughed and Marcia joined him.

'I begin to appreciate Aunt Katherine's anxiety for Gerald--do you
suppose there is any danger of malaria at Villa Vivalanti?'

For the rest of the drive they chatted quite gaily over the adventure.
Sybert for the time dismissed whatever he had on his mind; and as for
Marcia--St. Paul's cloisters were behind in Rome. As they turned into
the avenue the lights of the villa gleamed brightly through the trees.

'See, Gervasio,' said Sybert. 'That is where you are going to live.'

Gervasio nodded, too awed to speak. Presently he whispered, 'Shall I
see the little _principino_?'

'The little _principino_? what does he mean?' Marcia asked.

'The little principino with yellow hair,' Gervasio repeated.

'Gerald!' Sybert laughed. 'The '_principino_' is good for a free-born
American. Ah--and here is the old prince,' he added, as the carriage
wheels grated on the gravel before the loggia and Copley stepped out
from the hall to see who had come.

'Hello! is that you, Sybert?' he called out in surprise. 'And, Marcia!
I thought you had decided to stay in town--what in the deuce have you
brought with you?'

'A boy and a dog, O Prince,' said Sybert, as he set Gervasio on his
feet. 'Miss Marcia must plead guilty to the dog, but I will take half
the blame for the boy.'

Gervasio and Marcellus were conveyed into the hall, and it would be
difficult to say which was the more frightened of the two. Marcellus
slunk under a chair and whined at the lights, and Gervasio looked after
him as if he were tempted to follow. Mrs. Copley, attracted by the
disturbance, appeared from the salon, and a medley of questions and
explanations ensued. Gervasio, meanwhile, sat up very straight and very
scared, clutching the arms of the big carved chair in which Sybert had
placed him.

'We thought he might be useful to run errands,' Sybert suggested as
they finished the account of the boy's maltreatment.

'Poor child!' said Mrs. Copley. 'We can find something for him to do.
He is small, but he looks intelligent. I have always intended to have a
little page--or he might even do as a tiger for Gerald's pony-cart.'

'No, Aunt Katherine,' expostulated Marcia. 'I shan't have him dressed
in livery. I don't think it's right to turn him into a servant before
he's old enough to choose.'

'The position of a trained servant is a much higher one than he would
ever fill if left to himself. He is only a peasant child, my dear.'

'He is a psychological problem,' she declared. 'I am going to prove
that environment is everything and heredity's nothing, and I shan't
have him dressed in livery. I found him, and he's mine--at least half
mine.'

She glanced across at Sybert and he nodded approval.

'I will turn my share of the authority over to you, Miss Marcia, since
it appears to be in such good hands.'

'Marcia shall have her way,' said Mr. Copley. 'We'll let Gervasio be an
unofficial page and postpone the question of livery for the present.'

'He can play with Gerald,' she suggested. 'We were wishing the other
night that he had some one to play with, and Gervasio will be just the
person; it will be good for his Italian.'

'I suspect that Gervasio's Italian may not be useful for drawing-room
purposes,' her uncle laughed.

'I shall send him to college,' she added, her mind running ahead of
present difficulties, 'and prove that peasants are really as bright as
princes, if they have the same chance. He'll turn out a genius
like--like Crispi.'

'Heaven forbid!' exclaimed Sybert, but he examined Marcia with a new
interest in his eyes.

'We can decide on the young man's career later,' Copley suggested. 'He
seems to be embarrassed by these personalities.'

Gervasio, with all these august eyes upon him, was on the point of
breaking out into one of his old-time wails when Mrs. Copley
fortunately diverted the attention by inquiring if they had dined.

'Neither Mr. Sybert nor I have had any dinner,' Marcia returned, 'and I
shouldn't be surprised if Gervasio has missed several. But Marcellus,
under the chair there, has had his,' she added.

Mrs. Copley recalling her duties as hostess, a jangling of bells
ensued. Pietro appeared, and stared at Gervasio with as much
astonishment as is compatible with the office of butler. Mrs. Copley
ordered dinner for two in the dining-room and for one in the kitchen,
and turned the boy over to Pietro's care.

'Oh, let's have him eat with us, just for to-night.' Marcia pleaded.
'You don't mind, do you, Mr. Sybert? He's so hungry; I love to watch
hungry little boys eat.'

'Marcia!' expostulated her aunt in disgust. 'How can you say such
things? The child is barefooted.'

'Since my own son and heir is banished from the dinner-table, I object
to an unwashed alien's taking his place,' Copley put in. 'Gervasio will
dine with the cook.'

To Gervasio's infinite relief, he was led off to the kitchen and
consigned to the care of Francois, who later in the evening confided to
Pietro that he didn't believe the boy had ever eaten before. Marcia's
and Sybert's dinner that night was an erratic affair and quite upset
the traditions of the Copley menage. To Pietro's scandalization, the
two followed him into the kitchen between every course to see how their
protege was progressing.

Gervasio sat perched on a three-legged stool before the long kitchen
table, his little bare feet dangling in space, an ample towel about his
neck, while an interested scullery-maid plied him with viands. He would
have none of the strange dishes that were set before him, but with an
expression of settled purpose on his face was steadily eating his way
through a bowl of macaroni. It was with a sigh that he had finally to
acknowledge himself beaten by the Copley larder. Marcia called Bianca
(Marietta's successor) and bade her give Gervasio a bath and a bed.
Bianca had known the boy in his pre-villa days, and, if anything, was
more wide-eyed than Pietro on his sudden promotion.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As Marcia was starting upstairs that night, Sybert strolled across the
hall toward her and held out his hand.

'How would it be if we declared an amnesty,' he inquired--'at least
until Gervasio is fairly started in his career?'

She glanced up in his face a second, surprised, and then shook her head
with an air of scepticism. 'We can try,' she smiled, 'but I am afraid
we were meant to be enemies.'

Her room was flooded with moonlight; she undressed without lighting her
candle, and slipping on a light woollen kimono, sat down on a cushion
beside the open window. She was too excited and restless to sleep. She
leaned her chin on her hand, with her elbow resting on the low
window-sill, and let the cool breeze fan her face.

After a time she heard some one strike a match on the loggia, and her
uncle and Sybert came out to the terrace and paced back and forth,
talking in low tones. She could hear the rise and fall of their voices,
and every now and then the breeze wafted in the smell of their cigars.
She grew wider and wider awake, and followed them with her eyes as they
passed and repassed in their tireless tramp. At the end of the terrace
their voices sank to a low murmur, and then by the loggia they rose
again until she could hear broken sentences. Sybert's voice sounded
angry, excited, almost fierce, she thought; her uncle's, low, decisive,
half contemptuous.

Once, as they passed under the window, she heard her uncle say sharply:
'Don't be a fool, Sybert. It will make a nasty story if it gets
out--and nothing's gained.'

She did not hear Sybert's reply, but she saw his angry gesture as he
flung away the end of his cigar. The men paused by the farther end of
the terrace and stood for several minutes arguing in lowered tones.
Then, to Marcia's amazement, Sybert leaped the low parapet by the ilex
grove and struck out across the fields, while her uncle came back
across the terrace alone, entered the house, and closed the door. She
sat up straight with a quickly beating heart. What was the matter?
Could they have quarrelled? Was Sybert going to the station? Surely he
would not walk. She leaned out of the window and looked after him, a
black speck in the moonlit wheat-field. No, he was going toward Castel
Vivalanti. Why Castel Vivalanti at this time of the night? Had it
anything to do with Gervasio?--or perhaps Tarquinio, the baker's son?
She recalled her uncle's words: 'Don't be a fool. It will make a nasty
story if it gets out.' Perhaps people's suspicions against him were
true, after all. She thought of his look that night in the train. What
was behind it? And then she thought of the picture of him in the
carriage with the little boy in his arms. A man who was so kind to
children could not be bad at heart. And yet, if he were all that her
uncle had thought him, why did he have so many enemies--and so many
doubtful friends?

The breeze had grown cold, and she rose with a quick shiver and went to
bed. She lay a long time with wide-open eyes watching the muslin
curtains sway in the wind. She thought again of Paul Dessart's words in
the warm, sleepy, sunlit cloister; of the little crowd of ragamuffins
chasing the dog; of her long, silent ride with Sybert; of the moonlit
gateway of Castel Vivalanti, with the dark, high walls towering above.
Her thoughts were growing hazy and she was almost asleep when, mingled
with a half-waking dream, she heard footsteps cross the terrace and the
hall door open softly.




                               CHAPTER XI


MARCIA was awakened the next morning by Bianca knocking at the door,
with the information that Gervasio wished to get up, and that, as his
clothes were very ragged, she had taken the liberty the night before of
throwing them away.

For an instant Marcia blinked uncomprehendingly; then, as the events of
the evening flashed through her mind, she sat up in bed, and
solicitously clasping her knees in her hands, considered the problem.
She felt, and not without reason, that Gervasio's future success at the
villa depended largely on the impression he made at this, his first
formal appearance. She finally dispatched Bianca to try him with one of
Gerald's suits, and to be very sure that his face was clean. Meanwhile
she hurried through with her own dressing in order to be the first to
inspect his rehabilitation.

As she was putting the last touches to her hair she heard a murmur of
voices on the terrace, and peering out cautiously, beheld her uncle and
Sybert lounging on the parapet engaged with cigarettes. She had not
been dreaming, then; those were Sybert's steps she had heard the night
before. She puckered her brow over the puzzle and peered out again.
Whatever had happened last night, there was nothing electrical in the
air this morning. The two had apparently shoved all inflammable
subjects behind them and were merely waiting idly until coffee should
be served.

It was a beautifully peaceful spring morning that she looked out upon.
The two men on the terrace appeared to be in mood with the
day--careless, indifferent loungers, nothing more. And last night? She
recalled their low, fierce, angry tones; and the lines in her forehead
deepened. This was a chameleon world, she thought. As she stood
watching them, Gervasio for the moment forgotten, Gerald ran up to the
two with some childish prattle which called forth a quick, amused
laugh. Sybert stretched out a lazy hand and drew the boy toward him.
Carefully balancing his cigarette on the edge of one of the terra-cotta
vases, he rose to his feet and tossed the little fellow in the air four
or five times. Gerald screamed with delight and called for more. Sybert
laughingly declined, as he resumed his cigarette and his seat on the
balustrade.

The little play recalled Marcia to her duty. With a shake of her head
at matters in general, she gave them up, and turned her face toward
Gervasio's quarters. Bianca was on her knees before the boy, giving the
last touches to his sailor tie, and she turned him slowly around for
inspection. His appearance was even more promising than Marcia had
hoped for. With his dark curls still damp from their unwonted
ablutions, clad in one of Gerald's baggiest sailor-suits of red linen
with a rampant white collar and tie, except for his bare feet (which
would not be forced into Gerald's shoes) he might have been a little
princeling himself, backed by a hundred noble ancestors.

Marcia sank down on her knees beside him. 'You little dear!' she
exclaimed as she kissed him.

Gervasio was not used to caresses, and for a moment he drew back, his
brown eyes growing wide with wonder. Then a smile broke over his face,
and he reached out a timid hand and patted her confidingly on the
cheek. She kissed him again in pure delight, and taking him by the
hand, set out forthwith for the loggia.

'_Ecco!_ my friends. Isn't he beautiful?' she demanded.

Mr. Copley and Sybert sprang to their feet and came forward
interestedly.

'Who denies now that it's clothes that make the man?'

'I can't say but that he was as picturesque last night,' her uncle
returned; 'but he's undoubtedly cleaner this morning.'

'Where's Gerald?' asked Sybert. 'Let's see what he has to say of the
new arrival.'

Gerald, who had but just discovered Marcellus, was delightedly romping
in the garden with him, and was dragged away under protest and
confronted with the stranger. He examined him in silence a moment and
then remarked, 'He's got my cloves on.' And suddenly, as a terrible
idea dawned upon him, he burst out: 'Is he a new bruvver? 'Cause if he
is you can take him away.'

'Oh, my dear!' his mother remonstrated in horror. 'He's a little
Italian boy.'

Gerald was visibly relieved. He examined Gervasio again from this new
point of view.

'I want to go wifout my shoes and socks,' he declared.

'Oh, but he's going to wear shoes and socks, too, as soon we can get
some to fit him,' said Marcia.

'Do you want to see my lizhyards?' Gerald asked insinuatingly, suddenly
making up his mind and pulling Gervasio by the sleeve.

Gervasio backed away.

'You must talk to him in Italian, Gerald,' Sybert suggested. 'He's like
Marietta: he doesn't understand anything else. I should like to have
another look at those lizards myself,' he added. 'Come on, Gervasio,'
and taking a boy by each hand, he strode off toward the fountain.

Mrs Copley looked after them dubiously, but Marcia interposed, 'He's a
dear little fellow, Aunt Katherine, and it will be good for Gerald to
have some one to play with.'

'Marcia's right, Katherine; it won't hurt him any, and I doubt if the
boy's Italian is much worse than Bianca's.'

                  *       *       *       *       *

Thus Gervasio's formal installation at the villa. For the first week or
so his principal activity was eating, until he was in the way of
becoming as rosy-cheeked as Gerald himself. During the early stages of
his career he was consigned to the kitchen, where Francois served him
with soup and macaroni to the point of bursting. Later, having learned
to wield a knife and fork without disaster, he was advanced to the
nursery, where he supped with Gerald under the watchful eye of Granton.

Taken all in all, Gervasio proved a valuable addition to the household.
He was sweet-tempered, eager to please, and pitifully grateful for the
slightest kindness. He became Gerald's faithful henchman and implicitly
obeyed his commands, with only an occasional rebellion when they were
over-oppressive. He was quick to learn, and it was not long before he
was jabbering in a mixture of Italian and English with a vocabulary
nearly as varied as Gerald's own.

The first week following Gervasio's advent was a period of comparative
quiet at the villa, but one fairly disturbing little contretemps
occurred to break the monotony.

The boy had been promised a reward of sweet chocolate as soon as he
should learn to wear shoes and stockings with a smiling face--shoes and
stockings being, in his eyes, an objectionable feature of civilization.
When it came time for payment, however, Marcia discovered that there
was no sweet chocolate in the house, and, not to disappoint him, she
ordered Gerald's pony-carriage, and taking with her the two boys and a
groom, set out for Castel Vivalanti and the baker's. Had she stopped to
think, she would have known that to take Gervasio to Castel Vivalanti
in broad daylight was not a wise proceeding. But it was a frequent
characteristic of the Copleys that they did their thinking afterward.
The spectacle of Gervasio Delano in a carriage with the _principino_,
and in new clothes, with his face washed, very nearly occasioned a mob
among his former playmates. The carriage was besieged, and Marcia found
it necessary to distribute a considerable largess of copper before she
could rid herself of her following.

As she laughingly escaped from the crowd and drove out through the
gateway a man stepped forward from the corner of the wall and motioned
her to stop. For a moment a remembrance of her aunt's _rencontre_ with
the Camorrist flashed through her mind, and then she smiled as she
reflected that it was broad daylight and in full sight of the town. She
pulled the pony to a standstill and asked him what he wanted. He was
Gervasio's stepfather, he said. They were poor, hard-working people and
did not have enough to eat, but they were very lonely without the boy
and wished to have him back. Even American princes, he added, couldn't
take poor people's children away without their permission. And he
finished by insinuating that if he were paid enough he might reconsider
the matter.

Marcia did not understand all that he said, but as Gervasio began to
cry, and at the same time clasped both hands firmly about the seat in
an evident determination to resist all efforts to dislodge him, she saw
what he meant, and replied that she would tell the police. But the man
evidently thought that he had the upper hand of the situation, and that
she would rather buy him off than let the boy go. With a threatening
air, he reached out and grasped Gervasio roughly by the arm. Gervasio
screamed, and Marcia, before she thought of possible consequences,
struck the man a sharp blow with the whip and at the same time lashed
the pony into a gallop. They dashed down the stony road and around the
corners at a perilous rate, while the man shouted curses from the top
of the hill.

They reached the villa still bubbling with excitement over the
adventure, and caused Mrs. Copley no little alarm. But when Marcia
greeted her uncle's arrival that night with the story, he declared that
she had done just right; and without waiting for dinner, he remounted
his horse, and galloping back to Castel Vivalanti, rode straight up to
the door of the little _trattoria_, where the fellow was engaged in
drinking wine and cursing Americans. There he told him, before an
interested group of witnesses, that Gervasio was not his child; that
since he could not treat him decently he had forfeited all claim to
him; and that if he tried to levy any further blackmail he would find
himself in prison. Wherewith he wheeled his horse's head about and made
a spectacular exit from the town. If anything were needed to strengthen
Gervasio's position with Mr. Copley, this incident answered the purpose.

As a result of the adventure, Marcia, for the time, dropped Castel
Vivalanti from her calling-list and extended her acquaintance in the
other direction. She came to be well known as she galloped about the
country-side on a satin-coated little sorrel (born and bred in
Kentucky), followed by a groom on a thumping cob, who always
respectfully drew up behind her when she stopped. As often as she could
think of any excuse, she visited the peasants in their houses, laughing
gaily with them over her own queer grammar. It was an amused curiosity
which at first actuated her friendliness. Their ingenious comments and
naive questions in regard to America proved an ever-diverting source of
interest; but after a little, as she understood them better, she grew
to like them for their own stanch virtues. When she looked about their
gloomy little rooms, with almost no furnishing except a few copper pots
and kettles and a tawdry picture of the Madonna, and saw what meagre,
straitened lives they led, and yet how bravely they bore them, her
amusement changed to respect. Their quick sympathy and warm
friendliness awakened an answering spark, and it was not long before
she had discovered for herself the lovable charm of the Italian peasant.

She explored, in the course of her rides, many a forgotten little
mountain village topping a barren crag of the Sabines, and held by some
Roman prince in almost the same feudal tenure as a thousand years ago.
They were picturesque enough from below, these huddling grey-stone
hamlets shooting up from the solid rock; but when she had climbed the
steeply winding path and had looked within, she found them miserable
and desolate beyond belief. She was coming to see the under side of a
great deal of picturesqueness.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, though life was moving in an even groove at Villa Vivalanti,
the same could not be said of the rest of Italy. Each day brought fresh
reports of rioting throughout the southern provinces, and travellers
hurrying north reported that every town of any size was under martial
law. In spite of reassuring newspaper articles, written under the eye
of the police, it was evident that affairs were fast approaching a
crisis. There was not much anxiety felt in the immediate neighbourhood
of Rome, for the capital was too great a stronghold of the army to be
in actual danger from mobs. The affair, if anything, was regarded as a
welcome diversion from the tediousness of Lent, and the embassies and
large hotels where the foreigners congregated were animated by a not
unpleasurable air of excitement.

Conflicting opinions of every sort were current. Some shook their heads
wisely, and said that in their opinion the matter was much more serious
than appeared on the surface. They should not be surprised to see the
scenes of the French Commune enacted over again; and they intimated
further, that since it had to happen, they were very willing to be on
hand in time to see the fun.

Many expressed the belief that the trouble had nothing to do with the
price of bread; the wheat famine was merely a pretext for stirring up
the people. It was well known that the universities, the younger
generation of writers and newspaper men, even the ranks of the army,
were riddled with socialism. What more likely than that the socialists
and the church adherents had united to overthrow the government,
intending as soon as their end was accomplished to turn upon each other
and fight it out for supremacy? It was the opinion of these that the
government should have adopted the most drastic measures possible, and
was doing very foolishly in catering to the populace by putting down
the _dazio_. Still others held that the government should have
abolished the _dazio_ long before, and that the people in the south did
very well to rise and demand their rights. And so the affairs of the
unfortunate Neapolitans were the subject of conversation at every
_table d'hote_ in Rome; and the _forestieri_ sojourning within the
walls derived a large amount of entertainment from the matter.

Marcia Copley, however, had heard little of the gathering trouble. She
did not read the papers, and her uncle did not mention the matter at
home. He was too sick at heart to dwell on it uselessly, and it was not
a subject he cared to discuss with his niece. His family, indeed, saw
very little of him, for he had thrown himself into the work of the
Foreign Relief Committee with characteristic energy, and he spent the
most of his time in Rome. Marcia's interest in sight-seeing had come to
a sudden halt since the afternoon of Tre Fontane. She had ventured into
the city only once, and then merely to attend to the purchase of
clothes for Gervasio. The Roystons, on that occasion, had been out when
she called at their hotel, and her feeling of regret was mingled
largely with relief as she left her card and retired in safety to Villa
Vivalanti.

She had not analysed her emotions very thoroughly, but she felt a
decided trepidation at the thought of seeing Paul. The trepidation,
however, was not altogether an unpleasant sensation. The scene in the
cloisters had returned to her mind many times, and she had taken
several brief excursions into the future. What would he say the next
time they met? Would he renew the same subject, or would he tacitly
overlook that afternoon, and for the time let everything be as it had
been before? She hoped that the latter would be the case. It would give
a certain piquancy to their relations, and she was not ready--just at
present--to make up her mind.

Paul, on his side, had also pondered the question somewhat. Events were
not moving with the rapidity he wished. Marcia, evidently, would not
come into Rome, and he could think of no valid excuse for going out to
the villa. His pessimistic forecast of events had proved true. Holy
Week found the Roystons still in the city, treating themselves to
orgies of church-going. As he followed his aunt from church to church
(there are in the neighbourhood of three hundred and seventy-five in
Rome, and he says they visited them all that week) he indulged in many
speculations as to the state of Marcia's mind in regard to himself. At
times he feared he had been over-precipitate; at others, that he had
not been precipitate enough.

His aunt and cousins returned from a flying visit to the villa, with
the report that Marcia had adopted a boy and a dog and was solicitously
engaged with their education. 'What did she say about me, Madge?' Paul
boldly inquired.

'She said you were a very impudent fellow,' Margaret retorted; and in
response to his somewhat startled expression she added more
magnanimously: 'You needn't be so vain as to think she said anything
about you. She never even mentioned your name.'

Paul breathed a meditative 'Ah!' Marcia had not mentioned his name. It
was not such a bad sign, that: she was thinking about him, then. If
there were no other man--and he was vain enough to take her at her
word--nothing could be better for his cause than a solitary week in the
Sabine hills. He knew from present--and past--experience that an
Italian spring is a powerful stimulant for the heart.

On Tuesday of Holy Week Mrs. Royston wakened slightly from her
spiritual trance to observe that she had scarcely seen Marcia for as
much as a week, and that as soon as Lent was over they must have the
Copleys in to luncheon at the hotel.

'Where's the use of waiting till Lent's over?' Paul had inquired. 'You
needn't make it a function. Just a sort of--family affair. If you
invite them for Thursday, we can all go together to the tenebrae service
at St. Peter's. As this is Miss Copley's first Easter in Rome, she
might be interested.'

Accordingly a note arrived at the villa on Wednesday morning inviting
the family--Gerald included--to breakfast the next day with the
Roystons in Rome. On Thursday morning an acceptance--Gerald
excluded--arrived at the _Hotel de Lourdres et Paris_, and was followed
an hour later by the Copleys themselves.

The breakfast went off gaily. Paul was his most expansive self, and the
whole table responded to his mood. It was with a sense of gratification
that Marcia saw her uncle, who had lately been so grave, laughingly
exchanging nonsense with the young man. She felt, though she would
scarcely have acknowledged it to herself, a certain property right in
Paul, and it pleased her subtly when he pleased other people. She sat
next to him at the table, and occasionally, beneath his laughter and
persiflage, she caught an undertone of meaning. So long as they were
not alone and he could not go beyond a certain point, she found their
relations on a distinctly satisfying basis.

In spite of Paul's manoeuvres, he did not find himself alone with Marcia
that afternoon. There was always a cousin in attendance. Mr. and Mrs.
Copley, declining the spectacle of the tenebrae in St. Peter's--they had
seen it before--left shortly after luncheon. As they were leaving, Mr.
Copley remarked to Mrs. Royston--

'I will entrust my niece to your care, and please do not lose sight of
her until you put her in my hands for the evening train. I wish no more
such escapades as we had the other day.' And, to Marcia's discomfort,
the adventures involving the rescue of Marcellus and Gervasio were
recounted in detail. For an unexplained reason, she would have
preferred the story of their origin to remain in darkness.

Paul's face clouded slightly. 'My objections to Sybert grow rapidly,'
he remarked in an undertone.

Marcia laughed. 'If you could have seen him! He never spoke a word to
me all the way out in the train. He sat with his arms folded and a
frown on his brow, like--Napoleon at Moscow.'

Paul's face brightened again. 'Oh, I begin to like him, after all,' he
declared.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Toward five o'clock that evening every carriage in the city seemed to
be bent for the Ponte Sant' Angelo. A casual spectator would never have
chosen a religious function as the end of all this confusion. In the
tangle of narrow streets beyond the bridge the way was almost blocked,
and such progress as was possible was made at a snail's pace. The
Royston party, in two carriages, not unnaturally lost each other. The
carriage containing Marcia, Margaret, and Paul, getting into the jam in
the narrow Borgo Nuovo, arrived in the piazza of St. Peter's with
wheels locked with a cardinal's coach. The cardinal's coachman and
theirs exchanged an unclerical opinion of each other's ability as
drivers. The cardinal advanced his head from the window with a mildly
startled air of reproof, and the Americans laughed gaily at the
situation. After a moment of scrutiny the cardinal smiled back, and the
four disembarked and set out on foot across the piazza, leaving the men
to sever the difficulty at their leisure. He proved an unexpectedly
cordial person, and when they parted on the broad steps he held out of
his hand with a friendly smile and after a moment of perplexed
hesitation the three gravely shook it in turn.

'Do you think we ought to have kissed it?' Marcia inquired. 'I would
have done it, only I didn't know how.'

Paul laughed. 'He knew we weren't of the true faith. No right-minded
Catholic would laugh at nearly spilling a cardinal in the street.'

They stood aside by the central door looking for Mrs. Royston and
Eleanor and watching the crowd surge past. Paul was quite insistent
that they should go in without the others, but Marcia was equally
insistent that they wait. She had an intuitive feeling that there was
safety in numbers.

For a wonder they presently espied Mrs. Royston bearing down upon them,
a small camp-stool clutched to her portly bosom, and Eleanor panting
along behind, a camp-stool in either hand.

Mrs. Royston caught sight of them with an expression of relief.

'My dears, I was afraid I had lost you,' she gasped. 'We remembered,
just as we got to the bridge, that we hadn't brought any chairs, and so
we went back for them. Paul, you should have thought of them yourself.
I suppose we'd better hurry in and get a good place.'

Paul patiently possessed himself of the chairs and followed the ladies,
with a glance at Marcia which seemed to say, 'Is there this day living
a more exemplary nephew and gentleman than I?'

The tenebrae service on Holy Thursday is the one time in the year when
St. Peter's may be seen at night. The great church looms vaster and
emptier and more solemn then than at any other time. The eye cannot
penetrate to the distant dome hidden in shadows. The long nave
stretches interminably into space, the chapels deepen and broaden until
they are churches themselves. The clustered pillars reach upward till
they are lost in the darkness. What the eye cannot grasp the
imagination seizes upon, and the vast interior grows and widens until
it seems to stretch out arms to inclose all Christendom itself. On this
one night it does inclose all Rome--nobility and peasants, Italians and
foreigners: those who are of the faith, and those who are merely
spectators; those who come to worship; those who come to be amused--St.
Peter's receives them all with the same impartiality.

Standing outside, it had seemed to them that the whole city had flowed
through the doors; but within, the church was still approximately
empty. As they walked down the broad nave in the dimness of twilight,
Marcia turned to the young man beside her.

'At first I didn't think St. Peter's was impressive--that is, compared
to Milan and Cologne and some of the other cathedrals--but it's like
the rest of Rome, it grows and grows until----'

'It comes to be the whole world,' he supplied.

By the bronze baldacchino Mrs. Royston spread her camp-stools and sat
down.

'This is the best place we could choose,' she said contentedly as she
folded her hands. 'We shan't be very near the choir, but we can hear
just as well, and we shall have an excellent view of the altar-washing
and the sacred relics.' She spoke in the tone of one who is picking out
a stall for a theatrical performance.

From time to time friends of either the Roystons or Marcia drifted up
and, having paused to chat a few minutes, passed on, giving place to
others. As one group left them with smiles and friendly bows, Marcia
turned to Paul, who was standing beside her.

'It's really dreadful,' she said, 'the way the foreigners take
possession of Rome. This might as well be a reception at the Embassy.
If I were the pope, I would put up a sign on the door of St. Peter's
saying, "No _forestieri_ admitted."'

'Ah, but there are no _forestieri_ in the case of St. Peter's; it
belongs to all nations.'

Marcia smiled at the young man and turned away; and as she turned she
caught, across an intervening stream of heads, a face, looking in her
direction, wearing about the eyes a curiously quizzical expression. It
was the face of a middle-aged woman--an interesting face--not exactly
beautiful, but sparkling with intelligence. It seemed very familiar to
Marcia, and as her eyes lingered on it a moment the quizzical
expression gave place to one of amused friendliness. The woman smiled
and bowed and passed on. Marcia bowed vaguely, and then it flashed
through her mind who it was--the lady who wrote, the 'greatest gossip
in Rome,' whom she had met at the studio tea so many weeks before. She
had forgotten all about her unknown friend of that day, and now she
turned quickly to Paul to ask her identity. Paul was engaged in
answering some question of his aunt's, and before she could gain his
attention again a hush swept over the great interior and everything
else was forgotten in the opening chorus of the 'Miserere.'

The twilight had deepened, and the great white dome shone dimly far
above the blackness of the crowd. The voices of the papal choir swelled
louder and louder in the solemn chant, and high and separate and alone
rose the clear, flute-like treble of the 'Pope's Nightingale.' And as
an undertone, an accompaniment to the music, the shuffle and murmur of
thirty thousand listeners rose and fell like the distant beat of surf.

The candles on the altar showed dimly above their heads. As the service
continued, one by one the lights were extinguished. After half an hour
or so, the waiting and intensity grew wearing. The crowd was pressing
closer, and Margaret Royston craned her neck, vainly trying to discover
how many candles remained. Paul, with ready imagination, was answering
his aunt's questions as to the meaning of the ceremonies. Margaret
turned to Marcia.

'Poke this young priest in front of me,' she whispered, and ask him in
Italian how many candles are left.'

The young priest, overhearing the words, turned around with an amused
smile, obligingly stood on his tiptoes to look at the altar, and
replied in English that there were three.

'Thank you,' said Margaret; 'I didn't suppose you could talk English.'

'I was born in Troy, New York.'

'Really?' she laughed, and the two fell to comparing the rival merits
of the Hudson and the Tiber.

He proved most friendly, carefully explaining to the party the
significance of the service and the meaning of the different symbols.
Mrs. Royston looked reproachfully at her nephew, whose stories, it
transpired, did not accord with fact.

'You really couldn't expect me to know as much as a professional, Aunt
Eleanor,' he unblushingly expostulated. My explanations were more
picturesque than his, at any rate; and if they aren't true, they ought
to be.'

The last candle was finally out, and for a moment the great interior
remained in darkness. Then a noise like the distant rattle of thunder
symbolized the rending of the veil, and in an instant lights sprang out
from every arch and pier and dome. A long procession of cardinals,
choristers, and acolytes wound singing to the high altar--the 'Altar of
the World.'

Marcia stood by the railing and watched their faces as they filed past.
They were such thoughtful, spiritual, kindly faces that her respect for
this great power--the greatest power in Christendom--increased
momentarily. She felt a sort of shame to be there merely as a
spectator. She looked about at the faces of the peasants, and thought
what a barren, barren existence would be theirs without this church,
which promised the only joy they could ever hope to have.

When the ceremony of washing the altar with oil and wine was ended, the
young priest bade them a friendly good evening. He could not wait for
the holy relics, he said; they had supper at the monastery at seven
o'clock. He hastily added, however, in response to the smile trembling
on Margaret's lips, 'Not that they are not the true relics and very
holy, but I have seen them several times before.'

The relics were exhibited to the multitude from St. Veronica's balcony
far above their heads. Paul whispered to Marcia with a little laugh:

'Our friend the cardinal would be gratified, would he not, to see his
heretics bowing before St. Veronica's handkerchief? Look,' he added,
'at that peasant woman in her blue skirt and scarlet kerchief. She has
probably walked fifty miles, with her baby strapped to a board. I
suppose she thinks the child will have good fortune the rest of his
life If he just catches a glimpse of a splinter of the true cross.'

Marcia looked at the woman standing beside her, a pilgrim from the
Abruzzi, judging from her dress. She was raising an illumined face to
the little balcony where the priest was holding above their heads the
holy relic. In her arms she held a baby whose face she was turning
upward also, while she murmured prayers in his ears. Marcia's glance
wandered away over the crowd--the poor pilgrim peasants whose upturned
faces, worn by work and poverty, were softened for the moment into a
holy awe. Then she raised her eyes to the balcony where the priest in
his white robes was holding high above his head the shining silver
cross in which was incased St. Peter's dearest relic, the tiny splinter
of the true cross. The light was centred on the little balcony; every
eye in the great concourse was fixed upon it. The priest was fat, his
face was red, his attitude theatrical. The whole spectacle was
theatrical. A quick revulsion of feeling passed over her. A few moments
before, as she watched the procession of cardinals, she had been ready
to admit the spiritual significance of the scene; now she saw only its
spectacular side. It was merely a play, a delusion got up to dazzle the
poor peasants. This church was the only thing they had in life, and,
after all, what did it do for them? What could St. Veronica's
handkerchief, what could a splinter of the true cross, do to brighten
their lives? It was superstition, not religion, that was being offered
to the peasants of Italy.

She looked again across the sea of upturned faces and shook her head.
'Isn't it pitiful?' she asked.

'Isn't it picturesque?' echoed Paul.

'That priest up there knows he's deluding all these people, and he's
just as solemn as if he believed in the relics himself. The church is
still so hopelessly mediaeval!'

'That's the beauty of the church,' Paul objected. 'It's still
mediaeval, while the rest of the world is so hopelessly
nineteenth-century. I like to see these peasants believing in St.
Veronica's handkerchief and the power of the sacred Bambino to cure
disease. I think it's a beautiful exhibition of faith in a world where
faith is out of fashion. I don't blame the priests in the least for
keeping it up. It's a protest against the age. They're about the only
artists left. If I were a priest I'd learn prestidigitation, and
substantiate the efficacy of the relics with a miracle or so.'

'It's simply fostering superstition.'

'Take their superstition away and you deprive them of their most
picturesque quality.'

'You don't care for anything but what's picturesque!' she exclaimed in
a tone half scornful.

Paul did not answer. The ceremony was over and the crowd was beginning
to pour out. They turned with the stream and wedged their way toward
the right-hand entrance, near which their carriages were waiting. Paul
manoeuvred very adroitly so that the crowd should separate them from the
rest of the party at the door.

'I will tell you what I care for most,' he said in her ear as they
pushed out into the portico. 'I care for you.'

She perceived his drift too late and looked back with an air of dismay.
The others were lost in the moving mass of heads.

Paul saw her glance and laughed. 'You're going to take good care that
we shan't be alone together, aren't you?'

Marcia echoed his laugh. 'Yes,' she acknowledged frankly; 'I'm trying
to.'

'It doesn't matter. My time's coming; you can't put it off.' His hand
touched hers hanging at her side and he clasped it firmly. 'Come here;
we'll get out of this crowd,' and he pushed on outside and drew back
into a corner by one of the tall columns. The crowd surged past,
flowing down the steps like a river widening to the sea. Below them the
piazza was black with a tossing, moving mass of carriages and people.
The mass of the Vatican at their left loomed a black bulk in the night,
its hundreds of windows shining in the reflected lights of the piazza
like the eyes of a great octopus. At another time Marcia might have
looked very curiously toward the palace. She might have wondered if in
one of those dark windows Leo was not standing brooding over the throng
of worshippers who had come that day. How must a pope feel to see
thirty thousand people go out from under his roof--go out freely to
their homes--while he alone may not step across the threshold? At
another time she would have paused to play a little with the thought,
but now her attention was engaged. Paul still held her hand.

He squared himself in front of her, with his back to the crowd. 'Have
you been thinking about what I asked you?'

Had she been thinking! She had been doing nothing else. She looked at
him reproachfully. 'Let's not talk about it. The more I think, the more
I don't know.'

'That's an unfortunate state to be in. Perhaps I can help you to make
up your mind. Are you going to be in love with me some day,
Marcia--soon?' he persisted.

'I--I don't know.'

He leaned toward her, with his face very close to hers. She shrank back
further into the shadow. 'There they are!' she exclaimed, as she caught
sight of Eleanor's head above the crowd, and she tried to draw her hand
away.

'Never mind them. They won't be here for three minutes. You've got time
enough to answer me.'

'Please, not now--Paul,' she whispered.

'When?' he insisted, keeping a firm hold of her hand. 'The next time I
see you?'

'Yes--perhaps,' and she turned away to greet the others.




                              CHAPTER XII


THE week following Easter proved rainy and disagreeable. It was not a
cheerful period, for the villa turned out to be a fair-weather house.
The stone walls seemed to absorb and retain the moisture like a vault,
and a mortuary atmosphere hung about the rooms. Mr. Copley, with
masculine imperviousness to mud and water, succeeded in escaping from
the dampness of his home by journeying daily to the ever-luring
Embassy. But his wife and niece, more solicitous on the subject of hair
and clothes, remained storm-bound, and on the fourth day Mrs. Copley's
conversation turned frequently to malaria.

Marcia, who had taken the villa for better, for worse, steadfastly
endeavoured to approve of it in even this uncheerful mood. She divided
her time between romping through the big rooms with Gerald, Gervasio,
and Marcellus, and shivering over a brazier full of coals in her own
room, to the accompaniment of dripping ilex trees and the superfluous
splashing of the fountain. Her book was the _Egoist_, and the _Egoist_
is an illuminating work to a young woman in Marcia's frame of mind. It
makes her hesitate. She knew that Paul Dessart in no wise resembled the
magnificent Sir Willoughby, and that it was unfair to make the
comparison, but still she made it.

As she stood by the window, gazing down on the rain-swept Campagna, she
pondered the situation and pondered it again, and succeeded only in
working herself into a state of deeper indecision. Paul was
interesting, attractive--as her uncle said, 'decorative'; but was he
any more, or was that enough? Should she be sorry if she said 'no'?
Should she be sorrier if she said 'yes'? So her mind busied itself to
the dripping of the raindrops; and for all the thought she spent upon
the question, she wandered in a circle and finished where she had
started.

The Monday following Easter week dawned clear and bright again. Marcia
opened her eyes to a bar of sunlight streaming in at the eastern
window, and the first sound that greeted her was a joyful chorus of
bird-voices. She sat up and viewed the weather with a sense of
re-awakened life, feeling as if her perplexities had somehow vanished
with the rain. She was no nearer making up her mind than she had been
the day before, but she was quite contented to let it stay unmade a
little longer. The sound of horses' hoofs beneath her window told her
that her uncle had started for the station. When he was away and there
were no guests in the house, Marcia and Mrs. Copley usually had the
first breakfast served in their rooms. Accordingly, as she heard her
uncle gallop off, she made a leisurely toilet, and then ate her coffee
and rolls and marmalade at a little table set on the balcony. It was
late when she joined her aunt on the loggia.

Mrs. Copley looked up from an intricate piece of embroidery. 'Good
morning, Marcia,' she said, returning her niece's greeting. 'Yes, isn't
it a relief to see some sunshine again!--I have a surprise for you,'
she added.

'A surprise?' asked Marcia. 'My birthday isn't coming for two weeks.
But never mind; surprises are always welcome. What is it?'

'It isn't a very big surprise; just a tiny one to break the monotony of
these four days of rain. I had a note from Mrs. Royston this morning.
It should have come yesterday, only it was so wet that Angelo didn't go
for the mail.' She paused to rummage through the basket of silks. 'I
thought it was here, but no matter. She says that owing to these
dreadful riots they have changed all their plans. They have entirely
given up Naples, and are going north instead, on a little trip of a
week or so to Assisi and Perugia. She wrote to say good-bye and to tell
me that they would get back to Rome in time for your party; though they
are afraid they can't spend more than two or three days with us then,
as the change of plan involves some hurry. They leave on Wednesday.'

'That is too bad,' said Marcia, and with the words she uttered a sigh
of relief. Paul would go with them, probably; or, at any rate, she need
not see him; it would postpone the difficulty. 'But where is the
surprise?' she inquired.

'Oh, the surprise!' Mrs. Copley laughed. 'I entirely forgot it. I was
afraid they might think it strange that I hadn't answered the
note--though I really didn't get it in time--so I asked your uncle to
stop at their hotel and invite them all to come out to the villa for
the night. I thought that since we were planning to drive to the festa
at Genazzano to-morrow, it would be nice to have them with us. I am
sure they would be interested in seeing the festa.'

Marcia dropped limply into a chair and looked at her aunt. 'Is Mr.
Dessart coming too?'

'I invited him, certainly. What's the matter? Aren't you pleased? I
thought you liked him.'

'Oh, yes, I do; only--I wish I'd got up earlier!' And then she laughed.
The situation was rather funny, after all. She might as well make the
best of it. 'Suppose we send over to Palestrina and invite M. Benoit
for dinner,' she suggested presently. 'I think he is stopping there
this week, and it would be nice to have him. I suspect,' she added,
'that he is a tiny bit interested in Eleanor.'

A note was sent by a groom, who returned with the information that he
had found the gentleman sitting on a rock in a field, painting a
portrait of a sheep; that he had delivered the note, and got this in
return.

'This' was a rapid sketch on bristol-board, representing the young
Frenchman in evening clothes making a bow, with his hand on his heart,
to the two ladies, who received him on the steps of the loggia, while a
clock in the corner pointed to eight.

Marcia looked at the sketch and laughed. 'Here's an original
acceptance, Aunt Katherine.'

Mrs. Copley smiled appreciatively. 'He seems to be a very original
young man,' she conceded.

'_Naturellement._ He's _a prix de Rome_.'

'When Frenchmen _are_ nice they are very nice,' said Mrs. Copley; 'but
when they are not----' Words failed her, and she picked up her
embroidery again.

At the mid-day breakfast Marcia announced rather hopefully that she did
not think the Roystons would come.

'Why not?' her aunt inquired.

'They've lost their maid, and there won't be anybody to help them pack.
If they come out to the villa to-night they won't be ready to start for
Perugia on Wednesday. Besides, Mrs. Royston never likes to do anything
on the spur of the moment. She likes to plan her programme a week ahead
and stick to it. Oh, I know they won't come,' she added with a laugh.
'M. Benoit will be the only guest, after all.'

'And I've ordered dinner for eight!' said Mrs. Copley, pathetically. 'I
am thinking of driving over to the contessa's this afternoon--I might
invite her to join us.'

'Oh, no, Aunt Katherine! Please, not to-day. If the Roystons should
come, there'll be a big enough party without her; and, anyway, she
wouldn't be particularly interested--Mr. Sybert isn't here.'

'The contessa comes to see us, not Mr. Sybert,' Mrs. Copley returned,
with a touch of asperity.

Marcia smiled into her cup of chocolate and said nothing.

                  *       *       *       *       *

While the sun was sunk in its noonday torpor, she stood by her window,
gazing absently off toward the old monastery, engaged in a last valiant
struggle to make up her mind. She finally turned away with an impatient
shrug which banished Paul Dessart and his importunities to the bottom
of the Dead Sea. There was no use in bothering any more about it now;
Mrs. Royston's mind at least was no weathercock. Marcia clung
tenaciously to the hope that they would not come.

It was a beautiful afternoon, fresh and sparkling from the week of
rain, and she suddenly decided upon a horseback ride to brush from her
mind all bothersome questions. She got out her riding-habit and jerked
the bell-rope with a force which set bells jangling wildly through the
house, and brought Granton as nearly on a run as was consonant with her
dignity and years.

'It's nothing serious,' Marcia laughed in response to the maid's
anxious face; 'I just made up my mind to go for a ride, and in the
first flush of energy I rang louder than I meant. It's a great thing,
Granton, to get your mind made up about even so unimportant a matter as
a horseback ride.'

'Yes, miss,' Granton agreed somewhat vaguely as she knelt down to help
with a boot.

'How in the world do those soldiers in the King's guard ever get their
boots on?' Marcia asked.

'I don't know, miss,' said Granton, patiently.

Marcia laughed. 'Send word to the stables for Angelo to bring the
horses in fifteen minutes. I'm going to take a long ride, and I must
start immediately.'

'Very well, miss.'

'_Immediately_,' Marcia called after her. In dealing with Angelo
reiteration was necessary. He was an Italian, and he had still to learn
the value of time.

She tied her stock before the glass in a very mannish fashion, adjusted
her hat--with the least perceptible tilt--and catching up her whip and
gloves, started out gaily, humming a snatch of a very much reiterated
Neapolitan street song.

                    '"Jammo 'ncoppa, jammo ja . . .
                      Funiculi--funicula."'

It ended in a series of trills; she did not know the words. At the head
of the stairs she met Granton returning. Granton stood primly
expressionless, waiting patiently for her to have done before venturing
to speak.

Marcia completed her measure and broke off with a laugh. 'Well,
Granton, what's the matter?'

'Angelo has taken Master Gerald's pony to Palestrina to be shod and
both of the carriages are to be used, so the other men will be needed
for them, and there isn't any one left to ride with you.'

Marcia's smile changed to a frown. 'How stupid! Angelo has no business
to go off without saying anything.'

'Mr. Copley left orders for him to have the pony shod.'

'He's not Mr. Copley's groom; he's mine.'

'Yes, miss,' said Granton.

Marcia went on slowly downstairs, her frown gathering volume as she
proceeded. She wished to take a horseback ride, and she wished nothing
else for the moment. She foresaw that her aunt would propose that she
ride into Tivoli and take tea with the contessa. If there was one thing
she hated, it was to ride at a steady jog-trot beside the carriage; and
if there was a second thing, it was to take tea with the contessa.

She heard Mrs. Copley's and Gerald's voices in the salon and she
advanced to the doorway.

'Aunt Katherine! I'm furious! This is the first time in four days that
it has stopped raining long enough for me to go out, and I'm _dying_ to
take a gallop in the country. That miserable Angelo has gone off with
Gerald's pony, and there isn't another man on the place that can go
with me. You needn't propose my riding into Tivoli to take tea with the
contessa, for I won't do it.'

She delivered this outburst from the threshold, and as she advanced
into the room she was slightly disconcerted to see Laurence Sybert
lazily pulling himself from a chair to greet her--if she ever showed in
a particularly bad light, Sybert was sure to be at hand. He bowed, his
face politely grave, but there was the provoking suggestion of a smile
not far below the surface; and as she looked at him Marcia had the
uncomfortable feeling that her own face was growing red.

'I'm sorry about Angelo, my dear,' said Mrs. Copley. 'I didn't know
that you wanted to ride this afternoon. But here is Mr. Sybert who has
come out to see your uncle, and your uncle won't be back till evening.
I'm sure he will be glad to go with you.'

Marcia glanced back at her aunt with an expression which said, 'Oh,
Aunt Katherine, wait till I get you alone!'

'Certainly, Miss Marcia, I should be delighted to fill the recreant
Angelo's place,' he affirmed, but in a tone which to her ear did not
express any undue eagerness.

'Thank you, Mr. Sybert,' she smiled sweetly; 'you are very kind, but I
shouldn't think of troubling you. I know that Aunt Katherine would like
to have you go with her to call on the contessa.'

'If you will permit it. Miss Marcia, I will ride with you instead; for
though I should be happy to call on Contessa Torrenieri with Mrs.
Copley, I have just driven out from Tivoli, and by way of change I
should prefer not driving back.'

'It's awfully kind of you to offer, but I don't really want to ride. I
was just cross with Angelo for going off without saying anything.'

'Marcia,' remonstrated Mrs. Copley, 'that doesn't sound polite.'

Sybert laughed. 'There is nothing, Miss Marcia,' he declared, 'that
would give me more pleasure this afternoon than a gallop with you; and
with your permission----' he touched the bell.

Marcia shrugged her shoulders and gave the order as Pietro appeared.

'Send word to the stables for Kentucky Lil and Triumvirate to be
saddled at once.'

'You may go upstairs and borrow as much of Howard's wardrobe as you
wish,' said Mrs. Copley. 'I dare say you did not come prepared to play
the part of groom.'

'I'll try not to get them muddier than necessary,' he promised as he
turned toward the stairs.

He reappeared shortly in corduroys and leather puttees. Marcia was
leaning on the loggia balustrade, idly watching the hills, while a
diminutive stable-boy slowly led the horses back and forth in the
driveway. Sybert helped her to mount without a word, and they galloped
down the avenue in silence. He appreciated the fact that she would have
preferred staying at home to accepting his escort, and the situation
promised some slight entertainment. A man inclined to be a trifle
sardonic can find considerable amusement in the spectacle of a pretty
girl who does not wish to talk to him, but finds herself in a position
where she cannot escape. As Sybert had been passing a very hard week,
he was the more willing to enjoy a little relaxation at Marcia's
expense.

They pulled their horses to a walk at the gateway, and Sybert looked at
her interrogatively. She took the lead and turned to the left along the
winding roadway that led up into the mountains away from the Via
Praenestina. He rode up beside her again, and they galloped on without
speaking. Marcia did not propose to take the initiative in any
conversation; he could introduce a subject if he wished, otherwise they
would keep still. For the first mile or so he maintained the stolid
reserve of a well-trained groom. But finally, as they slowed the horses
to a walk on a steep hill-side, he broke the silence.

'Are we going anywhere, or just riding for pleasure?'

'Just for pleasure.'

He waited until they had reached the top of the hill before renewing
the conversation. Then, 'It is a pleasant day,' he observed.

Marcia regarded the landscape critically.

'Very pleasant,' she acquiesced.

'Looks a little like rain, however,' he added, anxiously fixing his eye
on a small cloud on the horizon.

Marcia studied the sky a moment with an heroic effort at seriousness,
and then she began to laugh.

'I suppose we might as well make the best of it,' she remarked.

'Philosophy is the wisest way,' he agreed.

'Have you seen Gervasio?'

'I have not yet paid my respects to him. He is well, I trust?'

'He is simply a walking appetite!'

'I thought he showed a tendency that way. Mrs. Copley says that you
have been suffering persecution for his sake.'

'Did she tell you about his stepfather? That's my story; she ought to
have left it for me. I can tell it much more dramatically. It was quite
an adventure, wasn't it?'

'It was. And you got off easily. It might have turned out to be more of
an adventure than you would have cared for.'

'Oh, I like adventures.'

'When they're ended safely, yes. But these Italian peasants are a
revengeful lot when they get it into their heads that they have been
mistreated. I don't believe you ought to drive about the country that
way.'

'I should think that two boys and a groom might be escort enough--the
pony-carriage doesn't accommodate many more.'

'Nevertheless, joking apart, I don't think it is safe. The country's
pretty thoroughly stirred up just at present.'

'You're as bad as Aunt Katherine with her tattooed man! As for being
afraid of these peasants, I know every soul in Castel Vivalanti, and
they're all adorable--with the exception of Gervasio's relatives.'

'If I were your uncle,' he observed, 'I should prefer a niece readier
to take suggestions.'

'I am ready to take his suggestions, but you're not my uncle.'

'No,' said Sybert, 'I am not; and----'

'And what?' Marcia asked.

He laughed.

'I believe we declared an amnesty, did we not? Do you think it is best
to reopen hostilities?'

'It strikes me that there has been more or less light skirmishing in
spite of the amnesty.'

'At least there has been no serious damage done on either side. I would
suggest, if heavy firing is to be recommenced, that we postpone it
until the ride home.'

'Very well. Let's talk some more about the weather. It seems to be the
only subject on which we can agree.'

Sybert bowed gravely.

'It's been rather rainy for the last week.'

'Very.'

'The villa must have been a little damp.'

'Very.'

'And rather monotonous?'

'Very!' Marcia laughed and gave the dialogue a new turn. 'I spent the
time reading.'

'Indeed?'

'The _Egoist_.'

'Meredith? Don't you find him a trifle--er--for rainy weather, you
know?'

'I found the _Egoist_,' she returned, 'a most suggestive work. It
throws interesting side-lights on the men one knows.'

'Oh, come, Miss Marcia,' he remonstrated. 'That's hardly fair; you
slander us.'

'You mustn't blame me--you must blame the author. It's a man who wrote
it.'

'He should be regarded as a traitor. In case he is captured and brought
into camp, I shall order him shot at sunrise.'

'He doesn't accuse all men of being Sir Willoughbys,' she returned
soothingly. 'I hadn't thought of you in exactly that connexion. If you
choose to wear the coat, you have put it on yourself.'

'We'll say, then, that it doesn't fit, and I'll resemble the other
fellow--the Daniel Deronda one--what's his name, Whitfield, Whitford?'
(Whitford, it will be remembered, was the dark horse who came in at the
finish and captured the heroine.)

Marcia laughed. 'I really can't say that the other fits any better. I'm
afraid you're not in the book, Mr. Sybert.'

They came to a fork in the roads and drew rein again.

'Which way?' he asked.

She paused and looked about. They were already far up in the mountains,
and towering ahead, nearer and clearer now, on the crest of a still
higher ridge, rose the old monastery she could see from her window. She
pointed with her whip to the gaunt pile of grey stone against the sky.

'Is that your destination?' he asked.

'Is it too far? I've been wanting to see it closer ever since we came
to the villa.'

He studied the distance. 'I should judge it's about seven kilometres in
a straight line, but there's no telling how long the road takes to get
there. We can try it, though; and if you're not in a hurry to get home,
we may reach it.'

'At any rate, there's nothing to prevent our turning back if we find
it's too far,' she suggested.

'Oh, yes; one can always turn back,' he agreed.

'One can always turn back.' The words caught Marcia's attention, and
she repeated them to herself. They seemed to carry an inner meaning,
and she commenced weighing anew her feelings toward Paul. Could she
turn back? Was it not too late? No, if she were on the wrong road, the
sooner the better; but was she on the wrong road? There were no
guide-posts; the end was hidden by a turning. She rode on, forgetting
to talk, with a shadow on her face and a serious light in her eyes.

'Well?' Sybert inquired, 'would you like my advice?'

'I'm afraid it's not a matter you can help me with,' she returned, with
a quick laugh.

They pushed on farther up into the hills, between groves of twisted
olive trees and sloping vineyards, through fields dyed blue and scarlet
with forget-me-nots and poppies. All nature was green and glistening
after the rain, and the mountain breeze blew fresh against their faces.
Neither could be insensible to the influence of the day. Their talk was
light and free and glancing--mere badinage; but it occasionally struck
a deeper note, and holding it for an instant, half reluctantly let it
go. Marcia had never known Sybert in this mood--she had not, as she
realized, known him in any. In all their casual intercourse of the past
few months they had scarcely exchanged a single idea. He was an
unexplored country, and his character held for her the attraction of
the unknown.

Sybert, on his side, glanced at her curiously from time to time as she
flung back a quick reply. With him, first impressions died hard. He had
first seen Marcia at a tea, the centre of a laughing group, with all
the room paying court to her. She was pretty and attractive,
faultlessly gowned, thoroughly at ease. He had, in his thirteen
seasons, met many women who played many parts; and the somewhat cynical
conclusion he had carried away from the experience was that if a woman
be but young and fair she has the gift to know it. But as he watched
her now he wondered suddenly if she were quite what he had thought her.
It struck him that what he had regarded as over-sophistication was
rather the pseudo-sophistication of youth; her occasional crudeness,
but the crudeness that comes from lack of experience. She knew nothing
of life outside the carefully closed confines of her own small world.
And yet he recognized in her a certain reckless spirit of daring, of
curiosity toward the world, that responded to a chord in his own
nature. He had seen it the night they found Gervasio. It was in her
face now as she galloped along against the wind, with her eyes raised
to the half-ruined towers of the mediaeval monastery. He had not been
very lenient toward her, he knew; and her scarcely veiled antagonism
had amused him. He felt now, as he watched her, a momentary impulse to
draw her out, to mould the direction of her thoughts, to turn her face
a new way.

After a wild gallop along the crest of a hill she drew up, laughing, to
steady her hair, which threatened to come tumbling down about her ears.
She dropped the rein loosely on the horse's neck in order to leave both
hands free, and Sybert reached over and took it.

'See here, young lady,' he remonstrated, 'you're going to take a
cropper some day if you ride like that.'

She glanced back with a quick retort on her lips, but his expression
disarmed her. He was not watching her with his usual critical look. She
changed the words into a laugh.

'Do you know what you make me feel like doing, Mr. Sybert? Giving Lil
the reins and galloping down that hill there with my hands in the air.'

'Perhaps I would better keep the reins in my own hands,' was his cool
proposition.

'I never knew any one who could rouse so much latent antagonism in a
person as you can! You never say a word but I feel like doing exactly
the opposite.'

'It's well to know it. I shall frame my future suggestions accordingly.'

Marcia settled her hat and stretched out her hand. He returned the
reins with a show of doubt.

'Can I trust you to restrain your impulses?' he inquired, with his eyes
on the declivity before them.

She gathered up the reins, but made no movement to go on. Instead she
half-turned in the saddle and looked behind.

They were on the shoulder of a mountain. Below them smaller foothills
receded, tier below tier, until they sank imperceptibly into the level
plain of the Campagna. Ahead of them the bare Sabines stretched in
broken ridges, backed in the distance by two snow-peaks of the
Apennines. Everywhere was the warmth of colouring, the brilliant hues
of an Italian spring.

'Italy is beautiful, isn't it?' Marcia asked simply.

'Yes,' he agreed; 'Italy is cursed with beauty.'

She turned her eyes inquiringly from the landscape to him.

'A nation of artists' models!' he exclaimed half contemptuously.
'Because of their fatal good looks, the Italians can't be allowed to be
prosperous like any other people.'

'Perhaps,' she suggested, 'their beauty is a compensation. They are
poor, I know; but don't you think they know how to be happy in spite of
it?'

'They are too easily happy. That's another curse.'

'But you surely don't want them to be unhappy,' she remonstrated.
'Since they have to be poor, shouldn't you rather see them contented?'

'Certainly not. They have nothing to be contented with.'

'But I don't see that it makes any difference _what_ you are contented
with so long as you _are_ contented.'

He looked at her with a half-smile.

'Nonsense, Miss Marcia; you know better than that. When people are
contented with their lot, does their lot ever improve? Do you think the
Italian people _ought_ to be happy? You have seen the way they live,
or--no,' he broke off, 'you don't know anything about it.'

'Yes, I do,' she returned. 'I know they're poor--horribly poor--but
they seem to get a good deal of pleasure out of life in spite of it.'

He shook his head. 'You can't convince me with that argument. Have you
never heard of a holy discontent? That's what these people need--and,'
he added grimly, 'some of them have got it.'

'A holy discontent,' she repeated. 'What a terrible thing to have! It's
like living for revenge.'

'Oh, well,' he shrugged, 'a man must live for something besides his
three meals a day.'

'He can live for his family,' she suggested.

'Yes, if he has one. Otherwise he must live for an idea.'

She glanced at him sidewise. She would have liked to ask what idea he
lived for, but it was a question she did not dare to put. Instead she
commented: 'It's queer, isn't it, how the ideas that men used to live
for have passed away? Chivalry and crusading and going to war and
living as hermits--I really don't see what's left.'

'The most of the old ideals are exploded,' he agreed. 'But we have new
ones to-day--sufficiently bad--to meet the needs of the present
century. A man can make a god of his business, for instance.'

Marcia shifted her seat a trifle uneasily as she thought of her father,
who certainly did make a god of his business. It may have struck Sybert
that it was not a propitious subject, for he added almost instantly--

'And there's always art to fall back upon.'

'But you don't object to that,' she remonstrated.

'No, it's good enough in its way,' he agreed; 'but it doesn't go very
deep.'

'Artists would tell you then that it isn't the true art.'

'I dare say,' he shrugged; 'but at best there are a good many truer
things.'

'What, for instance?'

'Well, three meals a day.'

Marcia laughed, and then she inquired--

'Suppose you knew a person, Mr. Sybert, who didn't care for anything
but art--who just wanted to have the world beautiful and nothing else,
what would you think?'

'Not much,' he returned; 'what would you?'

'I think that you go a great deal farther in the other extreme!'

'Not at all,' he maintained. 'I am granting that art is a very fine
thing; only there are so many more vital issues in life that one
doesn't have time to bother with it much. However, I suppose it's a
phase one has to go through with in Italy. Oh, I've been through with
it, too,' he added. 'I used to feel that Botticelli and Giorgione and
the rest of them were really important.'

'But you got over it?' she inquired.

'Yes, I got over it--one does.'

Marcia laughed again. 'Mr. Sybert,' she said, 'I think you are an
awfully queer man. You are so sort of unfeeling in some respects and
feeling in others.'

'Miss Marcia, you strike me as an awfully queer young woman for exactly
the same reasons.'

They had come to a curve in the road, and under an over-hanging
precipice hollowed out of the rock was a little shrine to the Madonna,
and beside it a rough iron cross.

'Some poor devil has met his fate here,' said Sybert, and he reined in
his horse and leaned from his saddle to make out the blurred
inscription traced on the bars. 'Felice Buconi in the year 1840 at this
spot received death at the hand of an assassin. Pray for his soul,' he
translated. 'Poor fellow! It's a tragedy in Italy to meet one's death
at the hands of an assassin.'

'Why more in Italy than in any other place?'

'Because one dies without receiving the sacrament, and has some trouble
about getting into heaven.'

'Oh!' she returned. 'I suppose when Gervasio's father wished that I
might die of an apoplexy he was not only damning me for this world, but
for the world to come.'

'Exactly. An apoplexy in Italy is a comprehensive curse.'

'I think,' she commented, 'that I prefer a religion which doesn't have
a purgatory.'

'Purgatory,' he returned, 'has always struck me as quite superior to
anything the Protestants offer. It really gives one something to die
for.'

'I should think, for the matter of that, that heaven direct would give
one something to die for.'

'What, for instance? Golden paving-stones, eternal sunshine, and
singing angels!'

'Oh, not necessarily just those things. They're merely symbolical.'

'At least,' said Sybert, 'perfect peace and beauty and happiness, and
nothing beyond. You needn't tell me, Miss Marcia, that you want to
spend an eternity in any such place as that. It might do for a
vacation--a villeggiatura--but for ever!'

'Probably angels' ideas of happiness are more settled than men's.'

'In that case angels must be infinitely lower than men. To be happy in
a place that has reached the end, that stands still, would require a
very selfish man--and I don't see why not a very selfish angel--to
settle down contentedly to an eternity of bliss while there's still so
much work to be done in the world.'

'I suppose,' she suggested, 'that when you get to be an angel, you
forget about the world and leave all the sorrow and misery behind.'

'A fools' paradise!' he maintained.

They were suddenly aroused from their talk by a peal of thunder. They
looked up to see that the sun had disappeared. Sybert's small cloud on
the horizon had grown until it covered the sky.

'Well, Miss Marcia,' he laughed, 'I am afraid we are going to get a
wetting to pay for our immersion in philosophy and art. Shall we turn
back?'

'If we're going to get wet anyway,' she said, 'I should prefer seeing
the monastery first, since we've come so far.' She looked across the
valley in front of them, where, not half a mile away, the walls rose
grim and gaunt amid a cluster of cypresses.

'You can see about as much from here as you could if you went any
nearer,' he returned. 'I should advise you to look and run.'

As he spoke a cool wind swept up the valley, swaying the olive trees
and turning their leaves to silver. A flash of lightning followed, and
a few big drops splashed in their faces.

'We're in for it!' Marcia exclaimed, as she struggled to control
Kentucky Lil, who was quivering and plunging.

Sybert glanced about quickly. The flying clouds overhead, and an
ominous orange light that had suddenly settled down upon the landscape,
betokened that a severe mountain storm was at hand. They would be
drenched through before they could reach the monastery--which, after
all, might not prove a hospitable order to ladies. He presently spied a
low stone building nearer at hand on the slope of the hill they had
just left behind. 'We'd better make for that,' he said, pointing it out
with his whip. 'Though it hasn't a very promising look, it will at
least be a shelter until the storm is over.'




                              CHAPTER XIII


THE drops were falling fast by the time they reached the building. They
hastily dismounted and pushed forward to the wide stone archway which
served as entrance. A door of rudely joined boards swung across the
opening, but it was ajar and banging in the wind. Sybert threw it open
and led the horses into the gloomy interior. It proved to be a
wine-cellar, probably belonging to the monastery. The room was low but
deep, with a dirt floor and rough masonry walls; in the rear two huge
vats rose dimly to the roof, and the floor was scattered with
farming-implements. The air was damp and musty and pungent with the
smell of fermenting grape-juice.

Sybert fastened the horses to a low beam by means of their bridles,
while Marcia sat down upon a plough and pensively regarded the
landscape. He presently joined her.

'This is not a very cheerful refuge,' he remarked; 'but at least it is
drier than the open road.'

She moved along and offered him part of her seat.

'I think I can improve on that,' he said, as he rummaged out a board
from a pile of lumber and fitted it at a somewhat precarious slope
across the plough. They gingerly sat down upon it and Marcia observed--

'I suppose if you had your way, Mr. Sybert, we should be sitting on a
McCormick reaper.'

'It would at least be more comfortable,' he returned.

The rain was beating fiercely by this time, and the lightning flashes
were following each other in quick succession. Black clouds were
rolling inland from across the Volscian mountains and piling layer upon
layer above their heads. Marcia sat watching the gathering storm, and
presently she exclaimed:

'This might be a situation out of a book! To be overtaken by a
thunderstorm in the Sabine mountains and seek shelter in a deserted
wine-cellar--it sounds like one of the "Duchess's" novels.'

'It does have a familiar ring,' he agreed. 'It only remains for you to
sprain your ankle.'

She laughed softly, with an undertone of excitement in her voice.

'I've never had so many adventures in my life as since we came out to
Villa Vivalanti--Marcellus, and Gervasio, and Gervasio's stepfather,
and now a cloud-burst in the mountains! If they're going to rise to a
climax, I can't imagine what our stay will end with.'

'Henry James, you know, says that the only adventures worth having are
intellectual adventures.'

Marcia considered this proposition doubtfully.

'In an intellectual adventure,' she objected, 'you could never be quite
sure that it really _was_ an adventure; you'd always be afraid you'd
imagined half of it. I think I prefer mine more visibly exciting.
There's something picturesque in a certain amount of real bloodshed.'

Sybert turned his eyes away from her with a gesture of indifference.

'Oh, if it's merely bloodshed you're after,' he said dryly, 'you'll
find as much as you like in any butcher's shop.'

She watched him for a moment and then she observed, 'I suppose you are
disagreeable on purpose, Mr. Sybert. You have a--' she hesitated for a
word, and as none presented itself, substituted a generic
term--'_horrid_ way of answering a person.'

He turned back toward her with a laugh. 'If I really thought you meant
it, I should have a still "horrider" way.'

'Certainly I mean it,' she declared. 'I've always liked to read about
fights and plots and murders in books. I think it's nice to have a
little blood spattered about. It's a sort of concrete symbol of
courage.'

'Ah--I saw a concrete symbol of courage the other day, but I can't say
that it struck me as attractive.'

'What was it?'

'A fellow lying by the roadside, in a pool of dirty water and blood,
with his mouth wide open, a couple of stiletto wounds in his neck, and
his brains spattered over his face--brains may be useful, but they're
not pretty.'

She looked at him gravely, with a slow expression of disgust.

'I suppose you think I'm horrider than ever now?'

'Yes, said Marcia; 'I do.'

'Then don't make any such absurd statement as that you think bloodshed
picturesque. The world's got beyond that. Do you object if I smoke? I
don't think it would hurt this place to have a bit of fumigating.'

She nodded permission, and watched him silently as he rolled a
cigarette and hunted through his pockets for a match. The coat did not
reward his search, and he commenced on the waistcoat. Suddenly she
broke out with--

'What's that in your pocket, Mr. Sybert?'

A momentary shade of annoyance flashed over his face.

'It's a dynamite bomb.'

'It's a revolver! What are you carrying that for? It's against the law.'

'Don't tell the police' he pleaded. 'I've always liked to play with
fire-arms; it's a habit I've never outgrown.'

'Why are you carrying it?' she repeated.

Sybert found his match and lighted his cigarette with slow
deliberation. Then he rose to his feet and looked down at her. 'You ask
too many questions, Miss Marcia,' he said, and he commenced pacing back
and forth the length of the dirt floor.

She remained with her elbow resting on her knee and her chin in her
hand, looking out at the storm. Presently he came back and sat down
again.

'Is our amnesty off?' he asked.

Before she could open her mouth to respond a fierce white flash of
lightning came, followed instantly by a deafening crash of thunder. A
torrent of water came pouring down on the loose tiles with a roar that
sounded like a cannonading. The air seemed quivering with electricity.
The horses plunged and snorted in terror, and Sybert sprang to his feet
to quiet them.

'Jove! It _is_ a cloudburst,' he cried.

Marcia ran to the open doorway and stood looking out across the
storm-swept valley. The water was coming down in an almost solid sheet;
the clouds hung low and black and impenetrable except when a jagged
line of lightning cut them in two. From the height across the valley
the tall square monastery tower rose defiantly into the very midst of
the storm, while the cypress trees at its base swayed and writhed and
wrung their hands in agony. Sybert came and stood beside her, and the
two watched the storm in silence.

'There,' he suddenly flashed out, with a little undertone of triumph in
his voice--'there is Italy!' He nodded toward the old walls rising so
stanchly from the storm. 'That's the way the Italians have weathered
tyranny and revolution and oppression for centuries, and that's the way
they will keep on doing.'

She looked up at him quickly, and caught a gleam of something she had
never seen before in his face. It was as if an internal fire were
blazing through. For an imperceptible second he held her look, then his
eyelids drooped again and his usual expression of reserve came back.

'Come and sit down,' he said; 'you're getting wet.'

They turned back to the plough again and sat side by side, looking out
at the storm. The beating of the rain on the tiles above their heads
made a difficult accompaniment for conversation, and they did not try
to talk. But they were electrically aware of each other's presence; the
wild excitement of the storm had taken hold of both of them. Marcia's
breath came fast through slightly parted lips, her cheeks were flushed,
her hair was tumbled, and there was a yellow glow in her deep grey
eyes. Her face seemed to vivify the gloomy interior. Sybert glanced at
her sidewise once or twice in half surprise; she did not seem exactly
the person he had thought he knew. Her hand lay in her lap, idly
clasping her gloves and whip. It looked white and soft against her
black habit.

Suddenly Marcia asked a question.

'Will you tell me something, Mr. Sybert?'

'I am at your service,' he bowed.

'And the truth?'

'Oh, certainly, the truth.'

She glanced down in her lap a moment and smoothed the fingers of her
gloves in a thoughtful silence. 'Well,' she said finally, 'I don't
know, after all, what I want to ask you; but there is something in the
air that I don't understand. Tell me the truth about Italy.'

'The truth about Italy?' He repeated the words with a slight accent of
surprise.

'Last week in Rome, at the Roystons' hotel, everybody was talking about
the wheat famine and the bread riots, and they all stopped suddenly
when I asked any questions. Uncle Howard will never tell me a thing; he
just jokes about it when I ask him.'

'He's afraid,' said Sybert. 'No one dares to tell the truth in Italy;
it's lese majeste.'

She glanced up at him quickly to see what he meant. His face was quite
grave, but there was a disagreeable suggestion of a smile about his
lips. She looked out of doors again with an angry light in her eyes.
'Oh, I think you are beastly!' she cried. 'You and Uncle Howard both
act as if I were ten years old. I don't think that a wheat famine is
any subject to joke about.'

'Miss Marcia,' he said quietly, 'when things get to a certain point, if
you wish to keep your senses you can't do anything but joke about them.'

'Tell me,' she said.

There was a look of troubled expectancy in her face. Sybert half closed
his eyes and studied the ground without speaking. Not very many days
before he had felt a fierce desire to hurl the story at her, to
confront her with a picture of the suffering that her father had
caused; now he felt as strongly as her uncle that she must not know.

'Since you cannot do anything to help, why should you wish to
understand? There are so many unpleasant things in the world, and so
many of us already who know about them. It's--' he turned toward her
with a little smile, but one which she did not resent--'well, it's a
relief, you know, to see a few people who accept their happiness as a
free gift from heaven and ask no questions.'

'I am not a baby. I should not care to accept happiness on any such
terms.'

'And you want to know about Italy? Very well,' he said grimly; 'I can
give you plenty of statistics.' He leaned forward with his elbows on
his knees and traced lines in the dirt floor with his whip, speaking in
the emotionless tone of one who is quoting a list from a catalogue.

'The poor people bear three-fourths of the taxes. Every necessity of
life is taxed--bread and salt and meat and utensils--but such things as
carriages and servants and jewels go comparatively free. When the
government has squeezed all it can from the people, the church takes
its share, and then the government comes in again with the state
lotteries. The Latin races are already sufficiently addicted to
gambling without needing any extra encouragement from the state. Part
of the revenue thus collected is spent in keeping up the army--in
training the young men of the country in idleness and in a great many
things they would do better without. Part of it goes to build arcades
and fountains and statues of Victor Emmanuel. The most of it stops in
official pockets. You may think that politics are as corrupt as they
can be in America, but I assure you it is not the case. In Italy the
priests won't let the people vote, and the parliament is run in the
interests of a few. The people are ignorant and superstitious; more
than half of them can neither read nor write, and the government
exploits them as it pleases. The farm labourer earns only from
twenty-five to thirty cents a day to support himself and his family.
Fortunately, living is cheap or there would soon not be any farm
labourers alive.

'Last year--' he paused and an angry flush crept under his dark
skin--'last year in Lombardy, Venetia, and the Marches--three of the
most fertile provinces in Italy--fifteen thousand people went mad from
hunger. The children of these _pellagrosi_ will be idiots and cripples,
and ten years from now you will find them on the steps of churches,
holding out maimed hands for coppers. At this present moment there are
ten thousand people in Naples crowded into damp caves and
cellars--practically all of them stricken with consumption and
scrofula, and sick with hunger.'

He leaned forward and looked into her face with blazing eyes.

'Marcia, in this last week I've seen--God!' he burst out, '_what_
things I've seen!'

He got up and strode to the door, and Marcia sat looking after him with
frightened eyes. The air seemed charged with his words. She felt
herself trembling, and she caught her breath quickly with a half-gasp.
She closed her eyes and pictures rose up before her--pictures she did
not wish to see. She thought of the hordes of poor people in Castel
Vivalanti, of the bony, wrinkled hands that were stretched out for
coppers at every turn, of the crowds of children with hungry faces. She
thought of the houses that they lived in--wretched little dens, dark
and filthy and damp. And it wasn't their fault, she repeated to
herself; it wasn't their fault. They were honest and frugal, they
wanted work; but there was not enough to go around.

She sat quite still for several moments, feeling acutely a great many
things she had scarcely divined before. Then presently she glanced over
her shoulder at the great vats towering out of the darkness behind her.
They suddenly presented themselves to her imagination as a symbol, a
visible sign of the weight of society bearing down upon the poor,
crushing out goodness and happiness and hope. As she watched them with
half-fascinated eyes, they seemed to swell and grow until they
dominated the whole room with the sense of their oppressiveness. She
rose with a little shiver and almost ran to the door.

'Let's go!' she cried.

'What's the matter?' he asked, looking at her face.

'Nothing. I want to go. It's stopped raining.'

He led out the horses and helped her to mount.

'What's the matter?' he asked again, 'Your hand is trembling. Did I say
anything to frighten you?'

She shook her head without answering, and when they reached the road
she drew a long breath of fresh air and glanced back with a nervous
laugh.

'I had the most horrible feeling in there! I felt as if something were
going to reach out from those vats and grab me from behind.'

'I think,' he suggested, 'that you'd better take some of your aunt's
quinine when you get home.'

'Mr. Sybert,' she said presently, 'I told you one day that I thought
poor people were picturesque, I don't think so any more.'

'I didn't suppose that you meant it.'

'But I did!' said Marcia. 'I've merely changed my mind.' She touched
Kentucky Lil with her whip and splashed on ahead down the road that led
toward the monastery, while Sybert followed with a slightly perplexed
frown.

The storm had passed as quickly as it had come. Loose, flying clouds
still darkened the sky, but the heavy black thunder-clouds were already
far to the eastward over the Apennines. In its brief passage, however,
the storm had left havoc behind it. The vines in the wayside vineyards
were stripped of their leaves, and the bamboo poles they were trained
upon broken and bent. Branches torn from the olive trees were strewn
over the grass, and in the wheat fields the young grain was bowed
almost to the ground. A fierce mountain torrent poured down the side of
the road through a gully that an hour before had been dry.

The mountain air was fresh and keen, and the horses, excited by the
storm, plunged on, recklessly irrespective of mud and water. They
crossed the little valley that lay between the hill of the wine-cellar
and the higher hill of the monastery, clattered through the single
street of the tiny hamlet which huddled itself at the base of the hill,
and wound on upward along the narrow walled roadway that turned and
unturned upon itself like the coils of a serpent. They passed through
the dark grove of cypresses that skirted the outer walls, and emerged
for a moment on a small plateau which gave a wide view of receding
hills and valleys and hills again. Below them, at a precipitous angle,
lay the valley they had just come through and the clustering
brown-tiled roofs of the little Noah's Ark village.

As they rode out from the shadow of the trees, by a common impulse they
both drew rein and brought their horses to a standstill at the edge of
the grove. Away to the eastward the sky was black, but the western sky
was a blaze of orange light, and the sun, an orange ball, was dropping
into the purple Campagna as into a sea. The shadows were settling in
the valley beneath them, but the hills were tinged with a shimmering
light, and the tower above their heads was glowing in a sombre,
softened beauty.

They had scarcely had time, however, to more than glance at the
wide-spread picture before them when they became aware of a little
human drama that was being enacted under their eyes.

A young monk in the brown cassock of the Franciscans, probably a lay
brother in the monastery, was standing in the vineyard by the roadside,
resting for a moment from his task of tying up the vines that had been
beaten down by the storm. He had not seen the riders--his back was
turned toward them, and his gaze was resting on the field across the
way, where scarlet poppies were growing among the wheat. But his eyes
were not for the flowers, nor yet for the light on the hills
beyond--these he had seen before and understood. He was watching a
dark-haired peasant girl and a man dressed in shepherd's clothes, who
were strolling side by side along the narrow pathway that led
diagonally through the wheat. The man, strong-limbed and brown and
muscular, in sheepskin trousers and pointed hat, was bending toward
her, talking insistently with vehement Italian gestures. She appeared
to listen, and then she shrugged her shoulders and half drew back,
while her mocking laugh rang out clearly on the still evening air. For
a moment he hesitated, then he boldly put his arm around her, and the
two passed down the hill and out of sight in the direction of the
hamlet. The poor young frate, his work forgotten, with hands idly
hanging at his sides, stared at the spot where they had disappeared.
And as he looked, the monastery bells in the campanile above him slowly
rang out the 'Ave Maria.' He started guiltily, and with a hasty sign of
the cross caught up his rosary and bowed his head in prayer.

At the unexpected sound of the bells the horses broke into a quick
trot. The monk, startled at the clatter of hoofs so near, turned
suddenly and looked in their direction. As he caught sight of Marcia's
and Sybert's eyes upon him, and knew that they had seen, a quick flush
spread over his thin dark face, and turning away he bowed his head
again.

Marcia broke the silence with a low laugh as they rode on into the
shade of the cypresses.

'He thought we were----' and then she stopped.

'Lovers too,' said Sybert. 'Poor devil! I suppose he thinks the world
is full of lovers outside his monastery walls. There,' he added, 'is a
man who is living for an idea.'

'And is beginning to suspect that it is the wrong one.'

He shot her a quick glance of comprehension. 'Ah, there's the rub,' he
returned, a trifle soberly--'when you begin to suspect your idea's the
wrong one.'

They rode on down the hill into the darkening valley. They were going
the straight way home now, and the horses knew it. They were still in
the hills when the twilight faded, and a young moon, just beyond the
crescent, took its place, riding high in a sky scattered thick with
flying clouds. It was a wild, wet, windy night, though on the lower
levels the roads were fairly dry: the storm had evidently wasted its
fury on the heights.

It was too fast a pace to admit much talking, and they both contented
themselves with their thoughts. Only once did Marcia break the silence.

'I feel as if we were carrying the good news from Ghent to Aix!'

Sybert laughed and quoted softly:--

     'Behind shut the postern, the lights sank to rest,
      And into the midnight we galloped abreast.
      Not a word to each other; we kept the great pace--
      Neck by neck, stride by stride, never changing our place----

Kentucky Lil would make quite a Roland,' he broke off.

'She's the nicest horse I ever rode,' said Marcia.

As they turned in at the villa gates she said contritely, 'I didn't
know it would take so long; I'm afraid, Mr. Sybert, that I've made you
very late!'

'Perhaps I like adventures too,' he smiled; 'and you and I, Miss
Marcia, have travelled far to-day.'




                              CHAPTER XIV


AS they galloped up the long avenue under the arching trees, the villa
presently came into view. The sound of laughing voices floated out from
the open windows. Marcia drew rein with a half-involuntary cry of
dismay. The Roystons had come.

'I'd forgotten!' she explained to her companion. 'We're giving a
dinner-party to-night.'

At the sound of the clattering hoofs on the gravel of the driveway a
gay group poured out on to the loggia, welcoming the dilatory riders
with laughter and questions and greetings.

'My dear child! Where have you been?'

'Here, Pietro; call some one to take the horses.'

'Is this the way you welcome guests? I shall never----'

'Dinner's been waiting half an hour. We were beginning to think----'

'I've been worried to death! You haven't caught cold, have you?'

'No, Aunt Katherine,' she laughed as she pulled off her gloves and
shook hands with the visitors. 'But we've been nearly drowned! We
should have been wholly drowned if Mr. Sybert hadn't spied a very leaky
ark on the top of a hill.'

'I'm relieved!' sighed her uncle as they passed into the hall. 'I was
beginning to fear that you had had a disagreement on the way, and that
it was another case of the Kilkenny cats.'

'Marcia, how you look! You're covered with mud!' cried Mrs. Copley.

With a slightly apprehensive glance toward the mirror, Marcia
straightened her hat and rubbed a daub of mud from her cheek. 'Kentucky
Lil and Triumvirate were in too much of a hurry to get home to turn out
for puddles,' she said. 'How much time may we have to dress, Aunt
Katherine?'

'Just fifteen minutes,' returned her uncle; 'and that is a quarter of
an hour more than you deserve. If you are not down then, we shall eat
without waiting for you.'

'Fifteen minutes, remember!' cried Marcia to Sybert as they parted at
the top of the stairs. 'I'll race with you,' she added; 'though I think
myself that a girl ought to have a handicap.'

She found Granton, a picture of prim disapproval, waiting with her
dress spread out on the bed. Marcia dropped into a wicker chair with a
tired sigh.

'You've ridden a long way,' Granton remarked as she removed a muddy
boot.

'Yes, Granton, I have; and dinner's already been waiting half an hour,
and Pietro looks like a thunder-cloud, and Mrs. Copley looks worried,
and the guests look hungry--what Francois looks like I don't dare to
think. We must _fly_; our reputations depend on it.'

'Am I ready?' she inquired, not much more than fifteen minutes later,
as she twisted her head to view the effect in the mirror.

'You'll do very well,' said Granton.

'I'm terribly tired,' she sighed; 'and I feel more like going to bed
than facing guests--but I suppose, in the natural order of events,
dinner must be accomplished first.'

'To be sure,' said the maid, critically adjusting her train.

'Your philosophy is so comfortable, Granton! As we have done yesterday,
so shall we do to-day and also to-morrow. It saves one the trouble of
making up one's mind.'

She reached the salon just in time to take Paul Dessart's silently
offered arm to the dining-room. Sybert did not appear until the soup
was being removed. He possessed himself of the empty chair beside
Eleanor Royston, with a murmured apology to his hostess.

'It's excusable, Sybert,' said Copley, with a frown. 'You should not
allow a woman to beat you.'

'The furniture in that room you gave me,' he complained gravely, 'was
built as a trap for collar-buttons. The side of the bed comes to within
three inches of the floor--I couldn't crawl under.'

'What did you do?' Eleanor Royston asked.

'I borrowed one of our host's--and I had a hard time finding it.'

'I shall put my wardrobe under lock and key the next time you visit
us,' Copley declared.

Sybert was curiously inspecting a small white globule he found by his
plate.

Marcia laughed and called from the other end of the table: 'It's your
own prescription, Mr. Sybert; drop it in your wine-glass and drink it
like a man. I've taken my dose.'

During this exchange of badinage Paul Dessart said never a word. He sat
with his eyes fixed moodily on the table-cloth, and--one hates to say
it of Paul--he sulked. For the first time since she had known him,
Marcia found him _difficile_. He started no subject himself, and those
that she started, after a brief career, fell lifeless. It may have been
that she herself was somewhat ill at ease, but in any case several
awkward silences fell between them, which the young man made no attempt
to break. Mr. Copley would never have said of him to-night that he was
an ornament to any dinner-table. It fell to the Frenchman across the
way to keep the ball rolling.

In an errant glance toward the other end of the table, Marcia saw
Sybert laughing softly at something Eleanor had said. She stayed her
glance a second to note involuntarily how well they went together.
Eleanor, with her white shoulders rising from a cloud of pale-blue
gauze, looked fair and distinguished; and Sybert, with his dark face
and sullen eyes, made an esthetically satisfying contrast. He was
bending toward her with that air of easy politeness, that superior
self-sufficiency, which had always exasperated Marcia so. But Eleanor
knew how to take it; she had been out nine seasons, and the smile with
which she answered him was quite as mocking as his own.

He looked to-night, through and through, what Marcia had always taken
him for--the finished cosmopolitan--the diplomat--the diner-out. But he
was not just that, she knew; she had seen him off his guard in the
midst of the storm that afternoon, and she was still tingling with the
surprise of it. She recalled what Mr. Melville had said that afternoon
in the ilex grove--she was always recalling what people said about
Sybert. The things seemed to stick in one's mind; he was a subject that
gave rise to many _mots_. 'You think you are very broad-minded because
you see the man underneath the peasant. Don't you think you could push
your broad-mindedness one step further and see the man underneath the
man of the world?' She had caught a glimpse that afternoon. It seemed
now as if his air of super civilization were only a mask to
conceal--she did not know what, underneath. She was searching for an
apt description when she heard the young Frenchman laughingly inquire:
'Mademoiselle Copley _est un peu distraite ce soir, n'est-ce pas_?'

With a little start, she became aware that some one had asked her a
question. For the remainder of the dinner she kept her eyes at her end
of the table, and exerted herself to be gracious to her taciturn
companion. Paul's bad temper was not unbecoming, and he scarcely could
have adopted a wiser course. Marcia had expected to find him sparkling,
enthusiastic, convincing; and she had come down prepared to withstand
his charm. _Mais voila!_ there was no charm to withstand. He was
sullen, moody, with a frown scarcely veiled enough for politeness. Some
one had once compared him, not very originally, to a Greek god. He
looked it more than ever to-night, if one can imagine a Greek god in
the sulks. What was the matter with him, Marcia could only guess.
Perhaps, as his cousin had affirmed, he was like a cat and needed
stroking the right way of the fur. At any rate, she found the new mood
rather taking, and she somewhat weakly allowed herself to stroke him
the right way. By the time they rose from the table he was, if not
exactly purring, at least not showing his claws.

At the Royston girls' suggestion, they put on evening wraps and
repaired to the terrace--except the two elder ladies, who preferred the
more tempered atmosphere of the salon. Mrs. Copley delegated her
husband and Sybert to act as chaperons--a position which Sybert
accepted with a bow, to the accompaniment of a slightly puzzled smile
on Eleanor's part. She could not exactly make out the gentleman's
footing in the household. They seated themselves in a group about the
balustrade, with the exception of Eleanor and Sybert, who strolled back
and forth the length of the flagging. Eleanor was doing her best
to-night, and her best was very good; she appeared to have wakened a
spark in even his indifference. Marcia, with her eyes on the two,
thought again how well they went together, and M. Benoit was a second
time on the verge of calling her _distraite_.

The two strollers after a time joined the group, Eleanor humming under
her breath a little French _chanson_ that had been going the rounds of
the Paris cafes that spring.

'Oh, sing something we all know,' said Margaret, and with a laughing
curtesy toward Sybert she struck into 'Fair Harvard.' The other girls
joined her. Their voices, rising high and clear, filled the night with
the swinging melody. It seemed strangely out of place there, in the
midst of the Sabine hills, with the old villa behind them and the Roman
Campagna at their feet. As their voices died away Sybert laughed softly.

'I swear I'd forgotten it!'

Margaret shook her head in mock reproof. 'Forgotten it!' she cried. 'A
man ought to be ashamed to acknowledge it if he had forgotten his Alma
Mater song. It's like forgetting his country.'

'I suspect,' said Eleanor, 'that it's time for you to go back to
America and be naturalized, Mr. Sybert.'

'Oh, well, Miss Royston,' he objected, 'I suppose in time one outgrows
his college, just as one outgrows his kindergarten.'

'And his country,' Marcia added, as much for Paul Dessart's benefit as
for his own.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Margaret, searching for diversion, presently suggested that they visit
the ghost. Marcia objected that the ghost was visible only during the
full moon, but the objection was overruled. There was some moon at
least, and a wild night like this, with flying clouds and waving
branches, was just the time for a ghost to think of his sins. Mr.
Copley, in the office of chaperon, remonstrated that the grass would be
damp; but there were rubbers, he was told. Marcia acquiesced in the
expedition without any marked enthusiasm; she foresaw a possible
_tete-a-tete_ with Paul Dessart. As they set out, however, she found
herself walking beside M. Benoit, with Paul contentedly strolling on
ahead at the side of his younger cousin, while Eleanor and the two
chaperons brought up the rear. As they came to the end of the laurel
path and approached the region of the ruins, Margaret paused with her
finger on her lips and in a conspiratorial whisper impressed silence on
the group. They laughingly fell into the spirit of the play, and the
whole party stole along with the elaborate caution of ten-year-old boys
ambuscading Indians.

The ruins in the dim light looked a fit harbour for ghosts. The
crumbling piles of masonry were almost hidden by the dark foliage, but
the empty fountain stood out clearly in a little open space between the
trees.

The group paused on the edge of the trees and stood with eyes turned
half expectantly toward the fountain. As they looked, they saw, with a
tremor of surprise, the dim figure of a man rise from the coping and
dissolve into the surrounding shadows. For a moment no one uttered a
sound beyond a quick gasp of astonishment, and an excited giggle from
Margaret Royston. Paul was the first to rise to the occasion with the
muffled assertion that he recognized the fair and warlike form in which
the majesty of buried Denmark did sometime march. Before any of them
had recovered sufficiently to follow the apparition, a second ghost
rose from the coping and stood wavering in apparent hesitancy whether
to recede or advance. This was more than tradition demanded, and with a
quick exclamation both Copley and Sybert sprang forward to solve the
mystery.

A babble of noisy expostulation burst forth. The ghost was vociferous
in his apologies. He had finished his work and had desired to take the
air. It was a beautiful night. He came to talk with a friend. He did
not know that the signore ever came here, or he would never have
ventured.

The tones were familiar, and a little sigh of disillusionment swept
through the group. The two men came back laughing, and Paul
apostrophized tragically:

'Another lost illusion! If all the ghosts turned out to be butlers, how
unromantic the world would be!'

The young Frenchman took up the tale of mourning.

'But the true ghost, Monsieur le Prince, whom I was preparing to paint;
after this he will not deign to poke his nose from the grave. It is an
infamy! An infamy!' he declared.

They laughingly turned back toward the villa, and Marcia discovered
that she was walking beside Paul. It had come about quite naturally,
without any apparent interposition on his part; but she did not doubt,
since he had the chance, that he would take advantage of it to demand
an answer, and she prepared herself to parry what he might choose to
say. He strolled along, whistling softly, apparently in no hurry to say
anything. When he did break the silence it was to remark that the
tree-toads were infernally noisy to-night. He went on to observe that
he wasn't particularly taken with her butler; the fellow protested too
much in the wrong place, and not enough in the right. From that he
passed to a flying criticism of villa architecture. Villa Vivalanti was
a daisy except for the eastern wing, and that was 'way off in style and
broke the lines. Those gingerbread French villas at Frascati, he
thought, ought to be razed to the ground by act of parliament.

Marcia responded rather lamely to his remarks, as she puzzled her
brains to think whether she had done anything to offend him. He seemed
entirely good-humoured, however, and chatted along as genially as the
first time they had met. She could not comprehend this new attitude,
and though it was just what she had wished for--such is the
contrariness of human nature--she vaguely resented it. Had M. Benoit
seen her just then he might have accused her, for the third time, of
being _distraite_.

The ghost-hunters, upon their return, shortly retired for the night, as
the festa at Genazzano would demand an early start. Before going
upstairs, Marcia waited to give orders about an open-air
breakfast-party she was planning for the morrow. In searching for
Pietro she also found her uncle. Mr. Copley, very stern, was engaged in
telling the butler that if it occurred again he would be discharged;
and the butler, very humble, was assuring the signore that in the
future his commands should be implicitly obeyed.

'Uncle Howard,' Marcia remonstrated, 'you surely aren't scolding the
poor fellow because of to-night? What difference does it make if he
does entertain his friends in the grounds of the old villa? We never go
near the place.'

'It is this particular friend I am objecting to.'

'Who was it?'

'Gervasio's stepfather.'

'Oh, you don't suppose,' she cried, 'that he is trying to steal the
child back again?'

'I should like to see him do it!' said Mr. Copley, with decision. 'He
doesn't want the boy,' he added. 'What he wants is money, but he isn't
going to get any. I won't have him hanging about the place, and the
servants may as well understand it first as last.'

Marcia, having outlined her plan for the breakfast to a somewhat
unresponsive Pietro, finally gained her room; and setting her candle
down on the table, she dropped into the first chair she came to with a
sigh of relief that the evening was over. She was tired, not only in
body, but in mind as well.

The evening was not quite ended, however. A gentle tap came on the
door, and she opened it to find Eleanor and Margaret in loose silk
dressing-gowns. 'Let us in quick,' said Margaret. 'We've just met a man
in the hall.'

'The ubiquitous Pietro shutting up windows,' added Eleanor. 'If I were
you, I'd discharge that man and get a more companionable butler. It's
uncanny for an Italian servant to be as grave as an English one.'

'Poor Pietro has just had a scolding, which, I suppose, accounts for
his gravity. It's funny,' she added, 'that's exactly the advice that
Paul gave me to-night.' The 'Paul' was out before she could catch it,
and she reddened apprehensively, but the girls let it pass without
challenging.

'We've come to talk,' said Margaret, possessing herself of the couch
and settling the cushions behind her. 'I hope you're not sleepy.'

'_Very_,' said Marcia; 'but I dare say I shan't be ten minutes from
now.'

'You needn't worry; this isn't going to be an all-night session,'
drawled Eleanor from the lazy depths of an easy-chair. 'We start at
nine for the Madonna's festa.'

'You'd better appreciate us now that you've got us,' added Margaret.
'We should by rights have slept in Rome to-night.'

'How did you manage it?'

'Paul took mamma down to the Forum to look at some inscriptions they've
just dug up; and while she was gone Eleanor and I scrambled around and
packed the trunks for Perugia. By the time she came back we had
everything ready to come out here, and our hats on waiting to start.
She didn't recover her breath until we were in the train, and then she
couldn't say anything before Mr. Copley. When it comes to starting on
Journeys,' Margaret added, 'mamma is not what you'd call impulsive.'

'Not often,' assented Eleanor; 'but there have been instances. By the
way,' she added, 'I wish you'd explain about Mr. Sybert; I confess I
don't quite grasp his standing in the family. How do you come to be
taking such lengthy horseback rides with a young man and no groom? You
never did that when my mother was chaperoning you.'

'No,' acquiesced Marcia; 'I didn't. But Mr. Sybert's a little
different. He's not exactly a young man, you know; he's a friend of
Uncle Howard's. He happened to be available this afternoon, and Angelo
didn't happen to be, so he came instead.'

'As a sort of sub-groom?' Eleanor asked. 'I should think he might
object to the position.'

'He couldn't help himself!' she laughed. 'Aunt Katherine forced him
into it.'

Eleanor regarded Marcia with a still puzzled smile. 'You talk about Mr.
Sybert as if he were a contemporary of your grandfather. How old is he,
may I ask?'

'I don't know. He's nearly as old as Uncle Howard. Thirty-five or
thirty-six, I should say.'

'A man isn't worth talking to under thirty-five.'

'Oh, nonsense!' Margaret objected. 'I never heard any one in my life
talk better than Paul, and he's exactly twenty-five.'

'Paul talks words; he doesn't talk ideas,' said her sister.

There was a pause, in which Eleanor leaned forward to examine some bits
of green and blue iridescent glass lying in a little tray on the table.
'What are these?' she inquired.

'Pieces of perfume-bottles that the grave-digger in Palestrina found in
an old Etruscan tomb. There were some bronze mirrors, and the most
wonderful gold necklace--I wanted it dreadfully, but he didn't dare
sell it; it's gone to a museum in Rome. Aren't these pieces of glass
lovely, though? I am going to have them set in gold and made into pins.'

'Here's a little bottle that's scarcely broken.' Eleanor held it up
before the candle and let the light play upon its surface. 'Who do you
suppose owned it before you, Marcia?'

'Some girl who turned to dust centuries ago.'

'And her necklaces and mirrors and perfume-bottles still exist. What a
commentary!'

'Thank goodness, they don't put such things in one's coffin nowadays,'
said Marcia; 'or twenty-five hundred years from now some other girl
would be saying the same of us.'

'Twenty-five hundred years,' Eleanor murmured. 'I declare, my nine
seasons sink into insignificance!' She dropped the bottle into its tray
and leaned back in her chair with a little laugh. 'America is a bit
tame, isn't it, after Italy? One doesn't get so many emotions.'

'I'm not sure but one gets too many in Italy,' said Marcia.

'How long are you going to stay over?'

'I don't know. It's so much easier not to make up one's mind. I shall
probably stay a year or so longer with Uncle Howard.'

'I like your uncle, Marcia. He has a very taking way of saying funny
things without smiling.'

'Ah,' sighed Marcia, 'he has!'

'And as for Mr. Sybert----' Margaret put in mockingly.

'I think he's about the most interesting man I've met in Europe,'
Eleanor agreed imperturbably.

'The most interesting man you've met in Europe?' Marcia opened her
eyes. The statement was sweeping, and Eleanor had had experience. 'How
do you mean?' she asked.

'Well,' said Eleanor, with the judicial air of a connoisseur, 'for one
thing, he has a striking face. I don't know whether you ever noticed
it, but he has eyes exactly like that portrait of Filippino Lippi in
the Uffizi. I kept thinking about it all the time I was talking to
him--sleepy sort of Italian eyes, you know--and an American mouth. It
makes an interesting combination; you keep wondering what a man like
that will do.'

As Marcia made no comment, she continued:

'He has an awfully interesting history. We met him at a reception last
week, and Mr. Melville told me all about him afterward. He was born in
Genoa--his father was United States consul--and he was brought up in
the midst of the excitement during the fight for Italian unity.
Politics was in the air he breathed. He knows more about the Italians
than they know about themselves. He speaks the language like a native,
and he never----'

'Oh, I know what Mr. Melville told you,' Marcia interrupted. 'He likes
him.'

'Don't most people?'

'Ask your cousin about him. Ask Mr. Carthrope, the English sculptor.
Ask anybody you please--barring my uncle--and see what you'll hear.'

'What shall I hear?'

'A different story from every person.'

'Well, really! He's worth knowing.'

'I detest him!' Marcia made the statement as much from habit as
conviction.

Eleanor regarded her a moment rather narrowly, and then she observed:
'I will tell you one thing, Marcia Copley; and that is, that
interesting men are mighty scarce in this world. I don't remember ever
having met more than half a dozen.'

'And you've had experience,' suggested Marcia.

'Nine seasons.'

'Who were they--the half-dozen?'

'One was a Kansas politician who wrote poetry. A most amazing mixture
of crudeness and tact--remarkably bright in some ways, but unexpectedly
lacking in others. He'd never read _Hamlet_; said he'd heard of it,
though. Another was a super-civilized Russian. I met him in Cairo. He
spoke seven languages, and didn't find any of them full enough to
express his thoughts. Another was----'

'The engineer,' suggested Marcia. She had heard of the engineer both
from Eleanor and her mother.

'Yes,' agreed Eleanor, 'the chief engineer on the Claytons' yacht. I
cruised around with them two years ago on the Mediterranean, and the
only interesting man on board was the engineer. He was English, and
he'd lived in India and Burma, and in--oh, hundreds of nameless places.
I couldn't get much out of him at first; he was pretty shy. English
people are, you know. But when he saw that one was really interested he
would tell the most astonishing tales. I didn't have much chance to
talk to him--he didn't appeal to mamma. That was one of the times that
mamma was impetuous,' she added with a laugh. 'Instead of keeping on to
Port Said with the boat, we disembarked at Alexandria and ran up to
Cairo for the rest of the winter. It was there I met the Russian. He
was stopping at _Shepheard's_.'

Eleanor paused, and her gaze became reminiscent as she sat toying with
the little Etruscan perfume-bottle.

'And the others?' Marcia prompted.

'Well, let me see,' Eleanor laughed. 'I once knew a professor of
psychology in a little speck of a New England college. He spent his
whole life in thinking, and he'd arrived at some very queer
conclusions. He was most entertaining--he knew absolutely nothing about
the world.' A shade of something like remorse crossed her face, and she
hastily abandoned the professor. 'Did I say there were any more? I
can't think who the fifth can be, unless I include the blacksmith who
married my maid. I never knew him personally; I merely judge from her
report of him. He beats her, I believe, when he gets angry; but he's so
apologetic afterward that she enjoys it. If you've ever read _Wuthering
Heights_ he's exactly like Heathcliff. I'd really like to know him.
He'd be worth studying.'

'That's the trouble,' complained Marcia. 'If you're a man you can go
around and get acquainted with any one you please, whether he's a
blacksmith or a prince; but if you're a girl you have to wait till
you're introduced at a tea. And the interesting ones never are
introduced at teas.'

'Yes,' agreed Eleanor; 'that's partly true. But, on the other hand, I
think you really get to know people better if you're a girl--what
they're really like inside, I mean. Men are remarkably confidential
creatures.'

'Did you find Mr. Sybert confidential?'

'N-no. I can't say that I did. He's queer, isn't he? You have the
feeling that he doesn't talk about what he thinks about--that's why I
should like to know him. It's not what a man does that makes him
interesting; it's what he thinks. It's his potentialities.'

Margaret rose with something of a yawn. 'If you're going to discuss
potentialities, I'm going to bed. Come on, Eleanor. To-morrow's the
festa of Our Lady of Good Counsel, and we start at nine o'clock.'

Eleanor rose reluctantly. 'I wish we weren't going to Perugia on
Wednesday. I should much rather stay here with Marcia.'

'And Mr. Sybert,' Margaret laughed.

'Oh, yes, Mr. Sybert,' Eleanor acquiesced. 'He annoys you until you get
him settled.'

'He's like one of those problems in algebra,' suggested Marcia. 'Given
a lot of things, to find the value of x. You work it exactly right and
x won't come.'

Margaret paused by the door and gathered her wrapper around her like a
toga.

'While you're talking about interesting people,' she threw back, 'I
know one who isn't appreciated, and that's Paul. He's a mighty nice
boy.'

'That's just what he is,' said Eleanor. 'A nice boy--_et c'est tout_.
Good night, Marcia. When we come back from Perugia we'll sit up all
night talking about interesting men. It's an interesting subject.'




                               CHAPTER XV


VILLA VIVALANTI was astir early in the morning--early, that is, for the
villa. Castel Vivalanti had been at work two hours and more when Pietro
went the rounds of the bedroom doors with his very obsequious, '_Buon
giorno_, Excellency; if it suits your convenience, coffee will be
served in the ilex grove in half an hour.' Coffee in the ilex grove was
a new departure in accordance with Marcia's inspiration of the night
before. And the ilex grove to-day, as Bianca exclaimed with clasped
hands, reminded one of paradise. The week of rain had left it a study
in green; the deep, rich tone of ilex leaves arching overhead, the blue
green moss on dark tree trunks, the tender tint of young grass
sprouting in the paths, and the yellow flickering sunlight glancing
everywhere. Out on the terrace the peacock was trailing his feathers
over the marble pavement with a conscious air of being in tune with the
day.

Marcia was first to appear. She stepped on to the loggia with a little
exclamation of delight at the beauty of the morning. In a pale summer
gown, her hair burnished by the sun, she herself was not out of touch
with the scene. She crossed the terrace and stood by the balustrade,
looking off through a golden and purple haze to the speck on the
horizon of Rome and St. Peter's. The peacock called her back, strutting
insistently with wide-spread tail.

'You ridiculous bird!' she laughed. 'I suppose you have been posing
here for two hours, waiting for some one to come and admire,' and she
hurried off to the grove to make sure that Pietro had carried out her
orders.

The table was spread by the fountain, where the green arched paths
converged and the ilexes grew in an open circle. The sunlight
flickering through on dainty linen and silver and glass and on little
cakes of golden honey--fresh from a farm in the Alban hills--made a
feast which would not have been out of place in a Watteau painting.
Marcia echoed Bianca's enthusiasm as her eyes fell upon the scene, and
Pietro flew about with an unprecedented ardour, placing rugs and
cushions and wicker chairs.

'It is perfect,' she cried, as she retreated down one of the paths to
get a perspective. 'But there are no flowers,' she added. 'That will
never do; we must have some lilies-of-the-valley, Pietro. You fix a
bowl in the centre, while I run and pick them,' and she started off
toward the garden borders.

Here Paul Dessart found her five minutes later. He greeted her with a
friendly, '_Felicissimo giorno_, signorina!' The transient clouds of
yesterday had disappeared from his brow as well as from the sky, and he
joined gaily in her task.

'There!' said Marcia as she rose to her feet and shook back the stray
hair from her eyes. 'Could anything be more in keeping with a sylvan
breakfast than these?' She held at arm's length for him to admire a
great bunch of delicate transparent bells sheathed in glistening green.
'Come,' she cried; 'the artist must arrange them'; and together they
turned toward the fountain.

A spray of bluest forget-me-nots hung over one of the garden borders.
The young man stooped and, breaking it, presented it with his hand on
his heart.

'Signorina,' he begged in a tone of mock-Italian sentiment--'dearest
signorina, I am going where duty calls--far, far away to Perugia.
_Non-te-scordar-di-me!_'

She laughed as she put the flowers in her belt, but with a slightly
deeper tinge on her cheek. Paul, in a mood like this, was very
attractive.

As they entered the grove they heard the prattle of childish voices,
and presently Gerald and Gervasio appeared down the walk, carrying each
a saucer of crumbs for their scaly friends of the fountain. They
stopped with big eyes at the sight of the table spread for breakfast.

'Oh, Cousin Marcia!' Gerald squealed delightedly, 'are we doin' to eat
out uv doors? May Gervas' an' me eat wif you? Please! Please!'

Marcia feigned to consider.

'Yes,' said she finally, 'this is my party, and if you'll be good boys
and not talk, I'll invite you. And when you've finished your bread and
milk, if you've been _very_ good, you may have some--' she paused and
lowered her voice dramatically while the two hung upon her
words--'honey!'

Paul Dessart laughed at what struck him as an anticlimax, but the boys
received the assurance with acclamation. Gervasio was presented to the
young painter, and he acknowledged the introduction with a grace equal
to Gerald's own. He had almost forgotten that he was not born a prince.
As Gerald shook hands he invited the guest, with visible hesitancy, to
throw the crumbs; but Paul generously refused the invitation, and two
minutes later the little fellows were kneeling side by side on the
coping of the fountain, while the arching pathways rang with their
laughter.

The rest of their excellencies soon appeared in a humour to fit the
morning, and the usually uneventful 'first breakfast' partook of the
nature of a fete. Gerald's and Gervasio's laughter rang free and
unchecked. The two were sitting side by side on a stone garden-seat
(the broken-nosed bust of a forgotten emperor brooding over them),
engaged for the present with twin silver bowls of bread and milk, but
with speculative eyes turned honeyward. The ghost of overnight was
resurrected and jeered at, while the ghost himself gravely passed the
cups. The sedately stepping peacock, who had joined the feast
uninvited, became the point of many morals as he lowered his feathers
in the dust to scramble for crumbs. Before the party ended, Sybert and
Dessart engaged in a good-natured bout on Sybert's theme of yesterday
concerning Italy's baneful beauty.

'Paul has missed his calling!' declared Eleanor Royston. 'He should
have been a ward politician in New York. It is a pity to see such a
gift for impromptu eloquence wasted in private life.'

For a time Paul subsided, but their controversy closed with the laugh
on his side. Apropos of riots, his thesis was that they were on the
whole very jolly. And he upheld this shockingly barbaric view with the
plea that he always liked to see people having a good time, and that
next to sleeping in the sun and eating macaroni the Italians were never
so happy as when engaged in a row. For his part, he affirmed, he
expected to find them tearing up the golden paving-stones of paradise
to heave at each other!

The image wrung a smile from even Sybert's gravity; It contained just
enough of truth, and not too much, to make it funny. Pietro's
announcement, at this point, that the carriages were ready to drive
their excellencies to the festa dissolved the party in a scurry for
hats and wraps. Sybert at first had declined the festa, on the plea
that he had business in Rome. Marcia had accepted his excuse with the
simply polite statement that they would be sorry not to have him, but
Eleanor Royston had refused to let him off.

'I've known a great many diplomats,' she affirmed; 'and though they are
supposed to be engaged with the business of nations, I have never yet
seen one who was too busy to attend a party. We shan't let you off on
that score.'

Somewhat to Paul's secret annoyance, and not entirely to Marcia's
gratification, he finally consented to change his mind. As the carriage
started, Marcia glanced back toward the loggia steps, where the two
little boys, one with yellow curls and one with black, were standing
hand in hand, wistfully watching the departure.

'Good-bye, Gerald and Gervasio,' she called. 'If you are very good,
I'll bring you something nice from the festa.'

The Copley pilgrimage was not the only one bound for Genazzano that
day. They passed on the road countless bands of contadini, both on foot
and on donkey-back, journeying toward the festa, their babies and
provisions in baskets on their heads. Genazzano, on St Mark's day,
wisely unites pleasure and piety, with masses in the cathedral and
jugglers in the piazza. The party from the villa devoted the larger
share of their time to the piazza, laughing good-naturedly at the
'Inglese! which was shouted after them at every turn. They lunched on
the terrace of the very modest village inn, in company with a jovial
party of young Irish students from the Propaganda who seemed to treat
the miracles of the wonder-working Madonna in the light of an
ecclesiastical joke. The afternoon found the sight-seeing ardour of the
two elder ladies somewhat damped. There was to be a function in the
cathedral at three, and they stated their intention of stopping quietly
in the low-raftered parlour of the inn until it should commence.
Eleanor Royston issued a frank invitation to Sybert to explore the old
Colonna castle which surmounted the town, and he accepted with what
struck Marcia as a flattering show of interest.

In regard to Laurence Sybert she herself was of many minds. A very
considerable amount of her old antagonism for him remained, mixed with
a curiosity and interest in his movements out of all proportion to the
interest he had ever expended upon her. And to-day she was experiencing
a fresh resentment in the feeling that his attitude toward Eleanor was
more deferential than toward herself. It was a venturesome act for any
man to awaken Marcia's pique.

Meanwhile she had Paul; and the slight cloud upon her brow vanished
quickly as she and Margaret and the young man turned toward the piazza.
Paul was in holiday humour, and the contagion of his fun was impossible
to escape. He wore a favour in his hat and a gilt medal of the Madonna
in his buttonhole; he laughed and joked with the people in the booths;
he offered his assistance to a prestidigitator who called for
volunteers; he shot dolls with an air-rifle and carried off the prize,
a gaudily decorated pipe, which he presented with a courtly bow to a
pretty peasant girl who, with frank admiration, had applauded the feat.
Finally he brought to a triumphant close a bargain of Marcia's. She had
expressed a desire for a peculiar style of head-dress--a long silver
pin with a closed fist on the end--worn by the women from the Volscian
villages. Paul readily agreed to acquire one for her. The _spillo_ was
plucked from an astonished woman's head and the bargaining began.

Sell it! But that was impossible. It was an heirloom! it had been in
the family for many generations; she could not think of parting with
it--not perhaps for its weight in silver?--the money was jingled before
her eyes. She wavered visibly. Paul demanded scales. They were brought
from the tobacco-shop, the tobacconist importantly presiding. The
_spillo_ was placed on one side; lire on the other--six--seven--eight.
The woman clasped her hands ecstatically as the pile grew.
Nine--ten--the scales hesitated. At eleven they went down with a thud,
and the bargain was completed. A pleased murmur rippled through the
crowd, and some one suggested, 'Now is the signorina _sposata_.' For,
according to Volscian etiquette, only married woman might wear the
head-dress.

Marcia shook her head with a laugh. She and Paul, standing side by
side, made an effective couple, and the peasants noted it with pleased
appreciation. Italians are quick to sympathize with a romance.
'_Promessi sposi_,' some one murmured, this time with an accent of
delighted assurance. Paul cast a sidewise glance at Marcia to see how
she would accept this somewhat public betrothal. She repudiated the
charge again, but with a slightly heightened colour, and the crowd
laughed gaily. As the two turned up the steep street toward the
cathedral, Paul held out his hand.

'Give me the pin,' he said. 'I will carry it in my pocket for you,
since you are not entitled--as yet--to wear it.'

Marcia handed it over, trying not to look conscious of the undertone in
his voice. He was very convincing to-day; she was reconsidering her
problem.

In the crowded little piazza before the cathedral they found the rest
of the party. They all mounted the steps and stood in a group, watching
the processions of pilgrims with votive offerings. They came in bands
of fifty and a hundred, bearing banners and chanting litanies. As they
approached the church they broke off their singing to shout 'Ave
Marias,' mounting on their knees and kissing the steps as they came.
Marcia, looking down over the tossing mass of scarlet and yellow
kerchiefs, compared it with the great function she had witnessed in St.
Peter's. These peasants approaching the Madonna's shrine on their
knees, shouting themselves hoarse, their faces glowing with religious
ardour, were to her mind far the more impressive sight of the two. She
turned into the church, half carried away by the movement and colour
and intensity of the scene. There was something contagious about the
simple energy of their devotion.

The interior was packed with closely kneeling peasants, the air filled
with a blue haze of incense through which the candles on the altar
glowed dimly. The Copley party wedged their way through and stood back
at the shadow of one of the side chapels, watching the scene. Paul
dropped on his knees with the peasants, and, sketch-book in hand, set
himself surreptitiously to copying the head of a girl in front. Marcia
watched him for a few moments with an amused smile; then she glanced
away over the sea of kneeling figures. There was no mechanical devotion
here: it came from the heart, if any ever did. Ah, they were too
believing! she thought suddenly. Their piety carried them too far; it
robbed them of dignity, of individuality, of self-reliance. Almost at
her feet a woman was prostrate on the floor, kissing the stones of the
pavement in a frenzy of devotion. She turned away in a quick revulsion
of feeling such as she had experienced in St. Peter's. And as she
turned her eyes met Laurence Sybert's fixed upon her face. He was
standing just behind her, and he bent over and whispered:

'You've seen enough of this. Come, let's get out,' and he made a motion
toward the sacristy entrance behind them. They stepped back, and the
crowd closed into their places.

Out in the piazza he squared his shoulders with a little laugh. 'The
church must make itself over a bit before I shall be ready to be
received into the fold. How about you, Miss Marcia?'

'It seemed so beautiful, their simple faith; and then suddenly--that
horrible woman--and you realize the ignorance and superstition
underneath. Everything is alike!' she added. 'Just as you begin to
think how beautiful it is, you catch a glimpse below the surface. It's
awful to begin seeing hidden meanings; you can never stop.'

'Look at that,' he laughed, nodding toward a house where a pig was
stretched asleep in the doorway. 'He's evidently been left to keep
guard while the family are at the festa. I suppose you've noticed that
every house is Genazzano has a separate door for the chickens cut in
the bottom of the big door. It's rather funny, isn't it?'

Marcia regarded the pig with a laugh and a sigh.

'Yes, it's funny; but then, the first thing you know, you begin to
think what a low standard of life the people must have who keep their
pigs and their chickens in the house with them, and it doesn't seem
funny any more.'

'Ah,' he said. 'You're coming on.'

'I'm afraid I am!' she agreed.

As they strolled toward the upper part of the town, they came upon a
group of men and boys talking and smoking and throwing dice in a
prolonged noonday rest. It was a part of the pilgrimage from the
village of Castel Vivalanti, and the group instantly recognized Marcia.
The festal spirit of the day, joined to a double portion of wine, had
made them more boisterous than usual; and one ragged little urchin, who
had been playing the part of buffoon for the crowd, fell upon the two
signori as a fresh subject for pleasantries. He set up the usual
beggar's whine, asking for soldi. The two paying no attention, he
changed the form of his petition.

'Signorina,' he implored, running along at Marcia's side and keeping a
dirty hand extended impudently in front of her, 'I have hunger,
signorina; I have hunger. Spare me, for the love of God, a few grains
of wheat.'

'That's a new formula,' Marcia laughed. 'It's usually bread they want;
I never heard them ask for wheat before.'

Sybert turned on the boy, with an air of threatening, and he hastily
scrambled out of reach, though he still persevered in his petition, to
the noisy amusement of the crowd.

Marcia spread out empty hands.

'I have no wheat,' she said, with a shake of her head.

The youngster turned to his following, mimicking her.

'The signorina has no wheat,' he cried. 'Will no one give to the
signorina? She is poor and she has hunger.'

Some one tossed a soldo. The boy pounced upon it and extended it toward
her.

'Behold, signorina! This good man is poor, but he is generous. He
offers you money to get some wheat.'

Marcia laughed at the play in thorough enjoyment, while Sybert, with an
angry light in his eye, seized the boy by the collar and cuffed him
soundly.

'Mr. Sybert,' she cried, 'take care; you'll hurt him!'

'I mean to hurt him,' he said grimly, as with a final cuff he dropped
him over the side of the bank.

The crowd jeered at his downfall as loudly as they had jeered at his
impudence, and the two turned a corner and left them behind.

'You needn't have struck him,' Marcia said. 'The boy didn't mean
anything beyond being funny. He is one of my best friends; his name is
Beppo, and he lives next door to the baker's shop.'

'If that is a specimen of your friends,' Sybert answered dryly, 'my
advice is that you shake their acquaintance.'

'I don't mind a little impertinence,' she said lightly. 'It's at least
better than whining.'

'I told you yesterday, Miss Marcia, that I didn't think you ought to be
running about the country alone--I think it even less to-day. It isn't
safe up here in the mountain towns, where the people aren't used to
foreigners.'

'Why don't you suggest to Uncle Howard that he engage a nurse for me?'

'I begin to think you need one!'

Marcia laid a light hand on his arm.

'Mr. Sybert, please don't speak to me so harshly.'

'I'll speak to your uncle--that's what I'll do,' he retorted.

They had by this time reached the castle, and having crossed the
drawbridge and the stone courtyard, they came out on the other side,
with the noisy little town left suddenly behind. The mountains rose
above them, the valley lay beneath, and before them a straight, grassy
road stretched into the hills, bordered by the tall arches of an old
aqueduct. They strolled along, talking idly, Marcia well in command of
the situation. There was a touch of audacity, even of provocation,
underneath her glance, and Sybert was amusedly aware of the fact that
he was being flirted with. Quite to Marcia's astonishment, he met her
on her own ground; he accepted the half-challenge in her manner and was
never the first to lower his eyes. They had come to a bank starred pink
with cyclamen and backed by one of the tall arches of the aqueduct.

'Suppose we sit down and look at the view,' he suggested.

Marcia seated herself on a projecting block of masonry, while Sybert
lounged on the grass at her side.

'Mr. Melville told me the other day,' he remarked presently, 'that he
remembers having seen your mother when she was a little girl.'

Marcia nodded and laughed. 'He told me about it--he says she was the
worst tom-boy he ever saw.'

'It was a very pretty picture he drew--I wonder if you ever rode the
colts bareback?'

'My mother was brought up on a Southern plantation; I, in a New York
house and a Paris convent--there weren't any colts to ride.'

'And your mother died when you were a little girl?'

'When I was twelve.'

'Ah, that was hard,' he said, with quick sympathy.

She glanced up in half surprise. It was the first time she had ever
heard him say anything so kindly.

'And the convent in Paris?' he asked. 'How did that happen?'

'Some one suggested it to my father, and I suppose it struck him as an
excellent way to dispose of me. Not that he isn't an appreciative
parent,' she added quickly, in response to an expression on his face;
'but the education of a daughter is a problem to a business man.'

'I should think it might be,' he agreed. 'And how did the convent go?'

'Not very well. I didn't learn anything but prayers and French, and I
was dreadfully homesick.'

'And then?'

'Oh, one or two governesses and a boarding-school, and after that
college.' Marcia laughed. 'You should have seen my father when I
suggested the college. He clutched at the idea like a drowning man; it
was another four years' reprieve.'

'It's a pity,' he remarked, 'that the French method of marrying one's
daughter offhand as soon as she gets out of school doesn't prevail in
America.'

'I really did feel guilty when I graduated, the poor man looked so
dazed through it all. He asked me if I would like to take a little trip
into Venezuela with him to look into some mines. It would have been
fun, wouldn't it?' she asked. 'I should have liked to go.'

'But, being charitable, you declined?'

'Yes, and having another plan in my head. It had been years since I had
seen Uncle Howard, and I thought it would be nice to come over and live
with him for a while.'

'And so here you are in Genazzano.'

'Here I am,' she agreed. 'But as soon as papa is ready to settle down
respectably like other people, I am going back to keep house for him,
and I shall take with me some fourteenth-century Italian furniture, and
some nice Italian servants, and give nice little Italian dinners.'

'And shall you invite me sometimes?'

'Drop in whenever you wish.'

Marcia began to laugh.

'Well?' he inquired. 'What is so funny?'

'To be talking to you this way--I shouldn't have issued that invitation
a week ago. You couldn't help yourself yesterday,' she added; 'Aunt
Katherine made you come; but really it's your own fault to-day.'

'Is that the impression I gave you? I am afraid I must have very bad
manners.'

'You have--rather bad,' she agreed.

'You hit straight,' he laughed. 'No,' he added presently; 'Aunt
Katherine had nothing to do with our walk to-day. If you care to know,
I'll tell you why I wanted to come. Yesterday afternoon I took a ride
with a most charming young woman, and I thought I'd like to renew the
acquaintance.'

'If that's intended for a compliment, it's of a very doubtful nature.
You have known this same charming young woman for the last three
months, and have never shown any marked desire for her company before.'

'I was blind, but I have been made to see.'

He commenced rolling a cigarette in a lazy, half-amused fashion, while
Marcia occupied an interval of silence by checking the progress of a
black beetle who found himself on the stone beside her, and who seemed
in a great hurry to get somewhere else. In whichever way he turned, a
mountain of a green leaf sprang up in his path. He ran wildly in a
circle, vainly seeking an outlet, his six little legs twittering with
anxiety.

Sybert stretched out a sympathetic hand and dropped him over the bank
to a place of safety.

'Now why must you do that?' Marcia inquired.

'A sense of fellow-feeling--I've watched too many women playing with
too many men not to know how the poor beast felt. His progress was
thwarted at every turn, without his being able to comprehend any
underlying motive or reason or law.'

'It was good for him,' she affirmed. 'I was giving him a new
experience--was widening his horizon. When I finally let him go he
would have been so thankful to think of the danger he had escaped, that
he would have been twice as happy a beetle as ever before.'

'That is one way of looking at it,' Sybert agreed.

Marcia watched him a moment speculatively. She was thinking about the
Contessa Torrenieri.

'Mr. Sybert,' she suggested, 'there are a lot of things I should like
to know about you.'

'I can think of nothing in my past that ought to be hidden.'

'These are things that you wouldn't tell me.'

'Try me and see.'

'Anything I choose to ask?'

'I am at your disposal.'

'Have you ever been in love with any one?'

He glanced up from his cigarette with an amused stare. 'What's this--a
confessional?'

'Oh, no--only you don't look as if you'd ever done such a foolish
thing, and I just wondered----'

'Half a dozen times.'

'Really?'

'Oh, I dare say not--really,' he laughed. 'In my cub days I used to
be--well, interested sometimes.'

'But you outgrew it?'

'It would be a rash man who would affirm that! You never can tell
what's waiting for you around the next corner.'

She would have liked to put a question or so in regard to the contessa,
but instead she remarked, 'There are some other things I'd like to ask
you.'

'I'm not so sure I'll answer if that's a specimen.'

'Why were you carrying a revolver yesterday?'

'You strike me as a very inquisitive young woman, Miss Marcia.'

'You strike me as a very mysterious man, Mr. Sybert.'

'Why was I carrying a revolver? For a very simple reason. I have been
travelling through the south, helping to quiet the rioters; and as that
is not a popular occupation, I thought it wisest to go armed. A
revolver is an excellent thing with which to persuade people, though in
all probability I shall never have any occasion to use it. I hope you
are satisfied.'

'Thank you,' said Marcia. 'Not that I believe you at all,' she added
with a laugh.

He regarded her a moment with a slightly perplexed frown. 'What on
earth do you take me for, Miss Marcia? An anarchist, a bandit, a second
Fra Diavolo in disguise? I am nothing so picturesque, I assure
you--merely a peaceful private citizen of the United States.'

'How do you come to know the baker's son, Tarquinio, so well?'

'I think I've answered questions enough. Suppose we have a confession
from you, Miss Marcia. Have you ever been in love?'

Marcia rose. 'It's a quarter past four, and we ought to be going back.
The Roystons have to catch the evening train into Rome.'




                              CHAPTER XVI


MARCIA drove to the station with the travellers, leaving the rest of
the party to return to the villa in the other carriage. She had a
slight feeling of compunction in regard to Paul, and it made her more
responsive to his nonsense than she might otherwise have been. In the
role of cicerone he naively explained the story of the ruins they
passed on the way, and the entire history of Rome, from Romulus and
Remus to Garibaldi, unfolded itself upon that nine-mile stretch of
dusty road. Marcia gave herself up gaily enough to the spirit of the
play, forgetting for the time any troubling questions lurking in the
background. When she bade him good-bye she smiled back, half
laughingly, half seriously, at his parting speech--a repetition of the
morning's pretty phrase--'_non-te-scordar-di-me!_'

As the carriage turned homeward she smiled to herself over her
yesterday's state at the prospect of meeting Paul. The actuality had
not been so disconcerting. She did not quite comprehend his new
attitude, but she accepted it as a tacit recognition of her desire to
let matters stand, and was grateful. She felt very kindly toward him
this evening. He was such a care-free, optimistic young fellow; and
even supposing he were too ready to look on the bright side of things,
was not Laurence Sybert, she asked herself, too ready also to look on
the dark side? Since his words of yesterday, in the old wine-cellar,
she had felt an undertone of sadness to her thoughts which she vaguely
resented. As she rode along now between the fresh fields, glowing in
the soft light of the April sunset, she was dimly conscious of a
struggle, a rebellion, going on within her own nature.

She seemed pulled two ways. The beautiful sunshiny world of dreams was
calling to her. And Paul stood at the crossways--laughing, careless,
happy Paul--holding out his hand with a winning smile to show the way
to Cytherea. But deep within her heart she felt the weight of the real
world--the world which means misery to so many people--dragging on her
spirits and holding her back. And in the background she saw Sybert
watching her with folded arms and a half-quizzical smile--Sybert making
no move either to lure her on or to turn her back--merely watching with
inscrutable eyes.

Happiness seemed to be her portion. Why could she not accept it gladly,
and shut her eyes to all else? If she once commenced seeing the misery
in the world, there would be no end. Until a few weeks before she had
scarcely realized that any existed outside of books, but she knew it
now; she had seen it face to face. She thought of the crowded, squalid
little houses of Castel Vivalanti; of the women who went out at sunrise
to work all day in the fields, of the hordes of children only half fed.
Oh, yes, she knew now that there was misery outside of books, but she
asked herself, with an almost despairing cry, why need she know? Since
she could do nothing to help, since she was not to blame, why not close
her eyes and pretend it was not there? It was the shrinking cry of the
soul that for the first time has tasted of knowledge; that with open
eyes is hesitating on the threshold of the real world, with a longing
backward glance toward the unreal world of dreams. But in life there is
no going back; knowledge once gained may not be cancelled, and there
was further knowledge waiting for Marcia not very far ahead.

Two little boys turning somersaults by the side of the carriage
suddenly recalled to her mind the boys at the villa, and her promise to
bring them a present from the festa. Not once had she thought of them
during the day, and the only possible present now was the inevitable
sweet chocolate of Castel Vivalanti. She glanced at her watch; there
was still an hour before dinner, and she ordered Giovanni to drive up
the hill to the town. Giovanni respectfully begged her pardon, with the
suggestion that the horses were tired; they had had a long journey and
the hill was steep. Marcia replied, with a touch of sharpness, that the
horses could rest all day to-morrow. They wound up the gradual ascent
at a walk, in company with the procession coming home for the night. It
was a sight which Marcia always watched with fresh interest:
field-workers with mattocks on their shoulders trudging wearily back to
supper and bed; washerwomen, their clothes in baskets on their heads,
calling cheery good-byes to one another; files of ragged little donkeys
laden with brush, sheep and pigs and goats, and long-horned oxen--where
they were all to be stowed for the night was an ever-recurring mystery.

Under the smiling moons of the Porta della Luna the carriage came to a
halt, and the crowd of Castel Vivalanti boys, who were in the habit of
scouring the highway for coppers, fell upon it vociferously. Marcia had
exhausted her soldi in Genazzano, and with a laughing shake of her head
she motioned them away. But the boys would not be shaken off; they
swarmed about the carriage like little rats, shrilly demanding money.
She continued to shake her head, and instantly their cries were
transferred to the taunts of the afternoon.

'Grano! Grano!' they shouted in chorus; and Giovanni raised his whip
and drove them away.

Marcia paused with her foot on the carriage-step, puzzling over this
new cry which was suddenly assailing her at every turn.

'What is the matter, Giovanni? Why are they always shouting "Wheat"?'

He waved his whip disdainfully. '_Chi sa_, signorina? They are of no
account. Do not listen to their foolishness.'

They were the same children to whom she had given chocolate not many
days before. 'They forget quickly!' she said to herself, 'perhaps,
after all, Paul was right, and beauty is their strongest virtue.'

The 'Ave Maria' was ringing as she turned into the crooked little
streets, and the town was buzzing like a beehive over its evening
affairs. Copper water-jars were coming home from the well, blue smoke
was pouring out of every chimney, and yellow meal was being sifted
outside the doors. Owing to the festa, the streets were crowded with
loungers, and in the tiny piazza groups of men were gathered about the
door of the tobacco-shop, arguing and quarrelling and gesticulating in
their excitable Italian fashion. It had been a week or more since
Marcia had visited the village, and now, as she threaded her way
through the crowd, it struck her suddenly that the people's usual
friendly nods were a trifle churlish; she had the uncomfortable feeling
that group after group fell silent and turned to stare after her as the
passed. One little boy shouted 'Grano!' and was dragged indoors with a
box on his ears.

'_Madonna mia!_' cried his anxious mother. 'Are we not poor enough
already, that you would bring down foreign curses upon the house?'

In the bake-shop Domenico served her surlily, answering her friendly
inquiries as to the health of his family and the progress of his
vineyard with grunts rather than words. Amazed and indignant, she
shrank within herself; and with head erect and hotly burning cheeks
turned back toward the gate, not so much as glancing at the people, who
silently made way for her.

'Ah, you see,' they murmured to one another, 'the foreign signorina
played at having a kind heart for amusement. But what does she care for
our _miseria_? No more than for the stones beneath her feet.'

                  *       *       *       *       *

Laurence Sybert, coming out from the village, was somewhat astonished
to find Giovanni drawn up before the gate. Giovanni hailed him with an
anxious air.

'_Scusi_, signore; have you seen the signorina? She is inside.' He
nodded toward the porta. 'She has gone to the bake-shop alone. I told
her the horses were tired, but she paid no attention; and the _ragazzi_
called "Wheat!" but she did not understand.'

'They shouted "Wheat!" did they?'

'_Si_, signore. They read the papers. The _Avanti_ yesterday----'

Sybert nodded. 'I know what the _Avanti_ said.'

He turned back under the archway and set out for the baker's--the
place, as it happened, from which he had just come. He had been
entertained there with some very plain comments on his friends in the
villa--as Giovanni suggested, they read their papers, and the truth of
whatever was stated in printer's ink was not to be doubted. It was
scarcely the time that Marcia should have chosen for an evening stroll
through Castel Vivalanti; and Sybert was provoked that she should have
paid so little heed to his warning of the afternoon. The fact that she
was ignorant of the special causes for his warning did not at the
moment present itself as an excuse. He had not gone far when he heard
shouts ahead. The words were unmistakable.

'Wheat! Wheat! Signorina Wheat!'

The volume of sound sent him hurrying forward in quick anxiety, almost
fearing a riot. But his first glance, as he came out into the piazza,
showed him that it was scarcely as serious as that. Marcia, looking
hurt and astonished and angry, was standing in the midst of a
fast-increasing crowd of dirty little street urchins, who were
shrieking and jumping and gesticulating about her. She was in no
possible danger, however; the boys meant no harm beyond being impudent.
For a second Sybert hesitated, with the grim intention of teaching her
a lesson, but the next moment he saw that she was already thoroughly
frightened. She called out wildly to a group of men who had paused on
the outskirts of the crowd; they laughed insolently, and made no move
to drive the boys away. She closed her eyes and swayed slightly, while
Sybert in quick compunction hurried forward. Pushing into the midst of
the tumult, he cuffed the boys right and left out of the way. Marcia
opened her eyes and regarded him dazedly.

'Mr. Sybert!' she gasped. 'What's the matter? What are they saying?'

'Can you walk?' he asked, stretching out a hand to steady her. 'Come,
we'll get out of the piazza.'

By this time other men had joined the crowd, and low mutterings ran
from mouth to mouth. Many recognized Sybert, and his name was shouted
tauntingly. 'Wheat! Wheat!' however, was still the burden of the cry.
One boy jostled against them impudently--it was Beppo of the
afternoon--and Sybert struck him a sharp blow across the shoulders with
his cane, sending him sprawling on the pavement. Half the crowd
laughed, half called angrily, 'Hit him, Beppo, hit him. Don't let him
knock you down,' while a half-drunken voice in the rear shouted,
'Behold Signor Siberti, the friend of the poor!'

'Here, let's get out of this,' he said. And clearing an opening with a
vigorous sweep of his cane, he hurried her down a narrow alley and
around a corner out of sight of the piazza. Leading the way into a
little _trattoria_, he drew a chair forward toward the door.

'Giuseppe,' he called, 'bring the signorina some wine.'

Marcia dropped into the chair and leaned her head on the back. She felt
dazed and bewildered. Never before had she been treated with anything
but friendliness and courtesy. Why had the people suddenly turned
against her? What had she done that they should hate her? In the back
of the room she heard Sybert explaining something in a low tone to
Giuseppe, and she caught, the words, 'she does not know.'

'_Poverina_, she does not know,' the woman murmured.

Sybert came across with a glass of wine.

'Here, Marcia, drink this,' he said peremptorily.

She received the glass with a hand that trembled, and took one or two
swallows and then set it down.

'It's nothing. I shall be all right in a moment. They pressed around me
so close that I couldn't breathe.'

The wine brought some colour back to her face, and after a few minutes
she rose to her feet.

'I'm sorry to have made so much commotion. I feel better now; let's go
back to the carriage.'

Skirting the piazza, they returned to the porta by a narrow
side-street, the boys behind still shouting after, but none approaching
within reach of Sybert's stick. They had regained the carriage and
reached the bottom of the hill before either of them spoke. Marcia was
the first to break the silence.

'What is it, Mr. Sybert, that I don't know?'

'A good many things, apparently,' he said coolly. 'For one, you don't
know how to take a piece of friendly advice. I told you this afternoon
that the country-side was too stirred up to be safe, and I think you
might have paid just a little attention to my warning. Respectable
Italian girls don't run around the streets alone, and they particularly
don't choose the evening of a festa for a solitary walk.'

'If you have quite finished, Mr. Sybert, will you answer my
question?--Why do they call me "Signorina Wheat"?'

He was apparently engaged with his thoughts and did not hear.

'Mr. Sybert, I asked you a question.'

'Why do they shout "Wheat"?' His tone was still sharp. 'Well, I suppose
because just at present wheat is a burning question in Italy, and the
name of Copley is somewhat unpleasantly connected with it. Your uncle
has just bought a large consignment of American wheat, which is on its
way to Italy now. His only object is to relieve the suffering--he loses
on every bushel he sells--but, as is usually the case with
disinterested people, his motives have been misjudged. The newspapers
have had a great deal to say about the matter, and the people, with
their usual gratitude toward their benefactors, have turned against
him.'

'Mr. Sybert, you are not telling me the truth.'

Sybert did not see fit to answer this charge; he folded his arms and
leaned against the cushions, with his eyes fixed on the two brass
buttons on the back of Giovanni's coat. And Marcia, the colour back in
her cheeks, sat staring at the roadway with angry eyes. Neither spoke
again till the carriage came to a stand before the loggia.

'Well, Miss Marcia, are we friends?' said Sybert.

'No,' said Marcia, 'we are not.'

She turned up to her room and set about dressing in a very mingled
frame of mind. She was still excited and hurt from her treatment in the
village--and very much puzzled as to its motive. She was indignant at
Sybert's attitude, at his presuming to issue orders with no reason
attached and expecting them to be obeyed. Instead of being grateful for
his timely assistance, she was irritated that he should have happened
by just in time to see the fulfilment of his warning. His superior 'I
told you so!' attitude was exasperating to a degree. She ended by
uniting her various wounded sensibilities into a single feeling of
resentment toward him. The desire that was uppermost in her mind was a
wish to pay him back, to make him feel sorry--though for exactly what,
she was not quite clear.

She hung up in the wardrobe the simple dinner-dress that Granton had
laid out on the bed, and chose in its place a particularly dignified
gown with a particularly long train. Having piled her hair on the top
of her head, she added a diamond star and a necklace with a diamond
pendant. She did not often wear jewels, but they were supposedly
'American' and irritating to a man of Sybert's cosmopolitan
sensibilities.

'Quite stately,' she murmured, critically surveying the effect in the
mirror. 'One might almost say matronly.'

As she started downstairs she was waylaid at the nursery door by a
small figure in a white nightgown.

'Cousin Marcia, what did you bwing me from ve festa?'

'Oh, Gerald! I brought you some chocolate and I left it in the
carriage. But never mind, dear; it's too late, anyway, for you to eat
it to-night. I will send and get it, and you shall have it with your
breakfast to-morrow morning. Be a good boy and go to sleep.'

She went downstairs with her mind bent upon chocolate, and crossed the
empty salon to the little ante-room at the rear. She had opened the
door and burst in before she realized that any one was inside; then
before the apology had risen to her lips she had heard her uncle's
words.

'Good heavens, Sybert, what can I do? You know my hands are tied.
Willard Copley would let the last person in Italy starve if he could
make one more dollar out of it!'

Marcia stood still, looking at her uncle in horror while the meaning of
his words sank into her mind. He whirled around upon her. His face was
whiter and sterner than she had ever seen it.

'What do you want, Marcia?' he asked sharply. 'Why don't you knock
before you come into a room?'

Marcia's face flushed hotly. 'I am sorry, Uncle Howard; I was in a
hurry, and didn't know any one was in here.'

'Oh, I beg your pardon, Marcia! I spoke hastily.'

She hesitated in the doorway and then faced him again.

'I heard what you said. Will you please tell me what you mean?'

Copley cast an annoyed glance at Sybert, who was standing in the
embrasure by the window with his hands in his pockets and his eyes bent
upon the floor. Sybert glanced up with a little frown, and then with a
half-perceptible shrug turned away and looked out of the window.

'I might as well tell you, I suppose--you appear to be hearing it from
other sources. Your father has been the originator this spring of a
very successful corner in wheat. He is, as you know, a keen judge of
markets; and foreseeing that wheat for a number of reasons was likely
to be scarce, he and one or two of his friends have purchased the whole
of the visible supply. As Italy has had to import more than usual--and
pay for it in gold when she hasn't much but paper at her command--you
can readily see that it places her in an awkward position. America is a
great country, Marcia, when a single one of her citizens can bankrupt a
whole kingdom.'

'You don't mean, Uncle Howard,' she cried, aghast, 'that my father has
caused the wheat famine?'

'There may be one or two minor causes, but I think he is deserving of
most of the credit. The name of Copley, I assure you, is not beloved in
Italy just now.'

'And that is what the boys meant when they shouted "Grano"?'

'Oh, it's no secret. We're celebrities in our small way. Two continents
are ringing with the name of the American Wheat King, and we come in
for a share of his fame. When you think about it,' he added, 'there is
something beautifully fitting about our taking Villa Vivalanti this
spring. We appear to be American editions of the "Bad Prince." I fancy
the old gentleman turned in his grave and smiled a trifle when I signed
the lease.'

'But, Uncle Howard, he doesn't understand. He does it like a
mathematical problem, just to show what he can do, just for the
pleasure of winning. Why don't you write to him? Why didn't you tell
him?'

'Tell him!' Copley laughed. 'You have not been acquainted with your
father for so many years as I have, Marcia. Why should he care for a
lot of Italian peasants? There are too many of them in existence
already. The food in this world has to be fought for, and those who are
beaten deserve to die.'

Marcia's face turned white as the meaning of a hundred petty incidents
flashed through her mind that before had had no significance. She knew
now why the people in Rome had stopped talking about the wheat famine
when she entered the room. She understood Sybert's attitude toward her
all the year--his quizzical expression once or twice when she spent
money over-lavishly. She recalled the newspaper the workman in Rome had
thrust in her face--the _Grido del Popolo_--the Cry of the People. She
did not have to ask now what it meant. The very beggars in the street
had known of her shame, while she alone was ignorant.

'Why didn't you tell me?' she cried.

'I did not wish to spoil your pleasure; there is no reason why you
shouldn't be happy. If all goes well, a year from now you will be one
of the notable heiresses of America. I only hope, when you're enjoying
your wealth, that you'll not think of the poor starving wretches in
Italy who gave it to you.'

Copley's tone was as brutal as his words. He had forgotten the girl
before him; he was talking to the man in America.

Marcia turned away and, with a deep sob, sank down by the table and
buried her face in her arms. Sybert threw up his head quickly with a
glance of anger, and Copley suddenly came to his senses. He sprang
forward and laid his hand on her shoulder.

'For Heaven's sake, Marcia, don't cry about it! I don't know what I'm
saying. I'm nervous and excited and worried. It isn't as bad as I told
you.'

Marcia had a pitiable sense that she was acting like a child when, of
all times, she ought to be calm and think. But the sudden revulsion of
feeling had swept her away. She had indeed been living in a fools'
paradise the past few months! The poor people Sybert had told her of
yesterday--the starving thousands in Naples--her own father was the
cause. And the peasants of Castel Vivalanti--no wonder they hated her;
while she distributed chocolate with such graceful condescension, her
father was taking away their bread. She thought over her uncle's words,
and then, as she realized their content, she suddenly rose, and faced
the two men.

'Uncle Howard,' she said, 'I think you've done very wrong not to tell
me this before. I had a right to know, and I could have helped it. My
father loves his business, but he loves me better. It's true, as I say,
he's just doing it as a sort of problem. He doesn't see the suffering
he causes, and he doesn't really believe there is any. Of course he
knows that some people lose when he gains, but he thinks that they go
into it with their eyes open, and that they must accept the chances of
war. He's exactly as good a man as either of you.' And then, as a
sudden recollection flashed across her, she whirled about toward
Sybert, her glance divided between indignation and contempt. 'And you
called me the "Wheat Princess" before every one in Paul Dessart's
studio. You knew that it wasn't my fault; you knew that I didn't even
know about the trouble, and you laughed when I told the story of the
Vivalanti ghost.'

Her voice broke slightly, and, turning her back, she drew a piece of
paper toward her on the table and began to write.

'There,' she said, holding out a scrawled sheet toward her uncle.
'There is a cablegram. Please see that it is sent immediately.'

Copley ran his eyes over it in silence, and his mouth twitched
involuntarily into a smile.

'Well, Marcia, I'll see that it goes. I don't know--it may do some
good, after all.' He paused awkwardly a moment and held out his hand.
'Am I forgiven?' he asked. 'I shouldn't have said anything against your
father; but he's my brother, remember, and while I abuse him myself I
wouldn't let an outsider do it. You are right; he doesn't know what he
is doing. You must forget what I said. I have thought about it too
much. Every one in Italy believes that I have an interest in the deal;
and when I am doing my best to help things along, it is a little hard,
you know, to be accused--by the very people I am giving to--of being
the cause of their distress.'

'Yes, Uncle Howard, I understand; I don't blame you,' she returned,
with a note of weariness in her voice; 'but--papa is really the kindest
man in the world.'

'Ah, Marcia, a very kind-hearted man nowadays can do a great deal of
harm by telegraph without having to witness the results.'

Sybert crossed the room toward her with a curious deep look in his
eyes. He half held out his hand, but Marcia turned away without
appearing to notice, and picking up her uncle's cheque-book from the
table, she tore out a leaf and scrawled across the face.

'There's some money for the Relief Committee,' she said, as she tossed
the slip of paper across the table toward him. 'That's all I have in
the bank just at present, but I will give some more as soon as I get
it.'

Sybert's face was equally impassive as he glanced from the paper back
to her.

'Thirteen thousand lire is a good deal. Do you think you ought----'

'I do as I please with my own money--this _is_ my own,' she added in
parenthesis. 'My mother left it to me.'

'As you please,' he returned, pocketing the slip with a half-shrug. 'I
know a village in Calabria that will be very grateful for a little help
until the olives ripen again.'

'Dinner is served,' announced Pietro in the doorway.

Marcia nodded to the two men.

'I don't want any dinner to-night,' and she turned upstairs to her
room. She sat for half an hour staring out at the darkening Campagna;
then she rose and lighted the candles, and commenced a letter to her
father. Her pen she dipped in blood. She told him everything she had
heard or seen or imagined about Italy--of the 'hunger madness' in the
north and the starving peasants in the south; of the poor people of
Castel Vivalanti and little Gervasio. She told him what the people said
about her uncle; that they called her the 'Wheat Princess'; and that
the children in the streets taunted her as she went past. She told him
that the name of Copley was despised from end to end of Italy. All the
crimes that have ever been laid at the door of the government and the
church and the ignorance of the people, Marcia heaped upon her
offending father's shoulders, but with the forgiving assurance that she
knew he didn't mean it. And would he please prove that he didn't mean
it, by stopping the corner immediately and sending wheat to Italy? It
was a letter to wring a father's heart--and a financier's.




                              CHAPTER XVII


FOR the next week or so Marcia steadfastly avoided meeting people.
There were no visitors at the villa, and it was easy to find pretexts
for not going into Rome. She felt an overwhelming reluctance to meeting
any of her friends--to meeting any one, in truth, who even knew her
name. It seemed to her that beneath their smiles and pleasant speeches
she could read their thoughts; that the words 'wheat, wheat, wheat'
rang as an undertone to every sentence that was spoken. Her horseback
rides were ridden in the direction away from Castel Vivalanti, and if,
by chance, she did meet any of her former friends the villagers, she
galloped past, looking the other way.

Mrs. Copley was engaged with preparations for the coming ball. It was
to be partially in honour of the Roystons, partially in honour of
Marcia's birthday, and all of Rome--or as much of it as existed for the
Copleys--was to be asked to stop the night either at Villa Vivalanti or
at the contessa's villa in Tivoli. Marcia, her aunt complained, showed
an inordinate lack of interest in these absorbing preparations. She was
usually ready enough with suggestions, and her listlessness did not
pass unnoticed. Mr. Copley's eyes occasionally rested upon her with a
guiltily worried expression, and if she caught the look she immediately
assumed an air of gaiety. Neither had made the slightest reference to
the subject of that evening's scene, except upon the arrival of a
characteristic cablegram from Willard Copley, in which he informed his
daughter that he was sending her a transport of wheat as a birthday
present.

'You see, Uncle Howard,' she had said as she handed him the message,
'it is possible to do good as well as harm by telegraph.'

Copley read it with a slight smile. 'After all, I'm afraid he's no
worse than the rest of us!' and with that, wheat was a tabooed subject.

For the future, however, he was particularly thoughtful toward his
niece to show that he was sorry, and she met his advances more than
half-way to show that she had forgiven; and, all in all, they came to a
better understanding because of their momentary falling out. Mrs.
Copley accounted for Marcia's apathy (and possibly nearest the truth)
on the ground that she had taken a touch of malaria in the old
wine-cellar, and she dosed her with quinine until the poor girl's head
rang.

It happened therefore that when the evening came to attend a musicale
at the Contessa Torrenieri's villa, Marcia could very gracefully
decline. The occasion of the function was the count's return from the
Riviera; and although Marcia had some little curiosity in regard to the
count, still it did not mount to such proportions that she was ready to
face the rest of the world for its sake.

Tivoli and Villa Torrenieri were a long nine miles away, and Villa
Vivalanti that evening dined earlier than usual. As Marcia came
downstairs in response to Pietro's summons, she paused a moment on the
landing; she had caught the sound of Sybert's low voice in the salon.
She had not seen him since the tempestuous ending of the San Marco
festa, and she had not yet determined on just what footing their
relations were. She stood hesitating with a very slight quickening of
the pulse, and then with a decided thrill of annoyance as an
explanation for his unexpected visit presented itself--he had returned
from Naples and come out to Villa Vivalanti for the purpose of
attending the contessa's musicale. Marcia went on downstairs more
slowly, and entered the salon with a none too cordial air. Sybert's own
greeting was in his usual vein of polite indifference. His manner
contained not the slightest suggestion of any misunderstanding in the
past. It transpired that he knew nothing of the impending party; he was
clothed in an unpretentious dinner-jacket. But he expressed his
willingness to attend, in spite of the lack of invitation--it was
doubtless waiting for him in Naples, he declared--provided his host
would lend him a coat. His host grumblingly assented, and Sybert
inquired, with a glance from Mrs. Copley's velvet and jewels to
Marcia's simple white woollen gown, what time they were planning to
start.

'About eight; it takes almost two hours to get there,' said Mrs.
Copley. 'Marcia is not going,' she added.

'Why not, Miss Marcia?'

She looked a trifle self-conscious as she put forth her excuse. 'I've
been having a little touch of malaria, and Aunt Katherine thought
perhaps the night air----'

'I remember, when I was a boy in school, I used frequently to have
headaches on Monday mornings,' said Sybert, with a show of sympathy.

Marcia sat in her room till she heard the carriage drive away, then she
dragged a wicker chair out to the balcony which overlooked the eastern
hills, already darkened into silhouettes against the sky. She sat
leaning back with her hands clasped in her lap, watching the outlines
of the old monastery fade into the night. She thought of the pale young
monk with his questioning eyes, and wondered what sort of troubles
people who lived in monasteries had. They were at least not her
troubles, she smiled, as she thought of Paul Dessart.

Suddenly she leaned over the railing and sniffed the light breeze as it
floated up from the garden. Mingled with the sweet scent of lilies and
oleanders was the heavy odour of a cigar. Her pulses suddenly
quickened. Could----? She pushed her chair back and rose with an
impatient movement. Pietro was holding a rendezvous with his friends
again, and entertaining them with her uncle's tobacco. The night was
chilly and she was cold. She turned into the dark room with a little
laugh at herself: she was staying away from the contessa's musicale to
avoid the night air?

She groped about the table for a book and started downstairs with the
half-hearted intention of reading out the evening in the salon. A wood
fire had been kindled that afternoon, to dispel the slight dampness
which the stone walls seemed to exude at the slightest suggestion of an
eastern wind. It had burned low now, and the embers gave out a slight
glow which was not obliterated by the two flickering candles on the
table--Pietro's frugal soul evidently looked upon the lamp as
unnecessary when Mr. and Mrs. Copley were away. Marcia piled on more
sticks, with a shake of her head at Italian servants. The one thing in
the world that they cannot learn is to build a fire; generations of
economy having ingrained within them a notion that fuel is too precious
to burn.

The blaze once more started, instead of ringing for a lamp and settling
down to her book, she dropped into a chair and sat lazily watching the
flames. Italy had got its hold upon her, with its spell of Lethian
inertia. She wished only to close her eyes and drift idly with the
current.

Presently she heard the outer door open and close, and steps cross the
hall. She looked up with a start to see Laurence Sybert in the doorway.

'What's the matter--did I surprise you?' he inquired.

'Yes; I thought you had gone to the party.'

'I was in the wine-cellar just as much as you,' he returned, with a
little laugh, as he drew up a chair beside her. 'Why can't I have
malaria too?'

His sudden appearance had been disconcerting, and her usual
self-assurance seemed to be wandering to-night. She did not know what
to say, and she half rose.

'I was just going to ring for the lamp when you came. Pietro must have
forgotten it. Would you mind----'

Sybert glanced lazily across the room at the bell. 'Oh, sit still. We
have light enough to talk by, and you surely aren't intending to read
when you have a guest.' He stretched out his hand and took possession
of her book.

'I don't flatter myself that you stayed away from the contessa's to
talk to me,' she returned as she leaned back again with a slight shrug.

'Why else should I have stayed?' he inquired. 'Do you think, when it
came to the point, your uncle wouldn't give me a coat?'

'Probably you found that it didn't fit.'

Sybert laughed. 'No, Miss Marcia; I didn't even try. I stayed
because--I wanted to talk with you.'

She let the statement pass in silence, and Sybert addressed himself to
a careful rearrangement of the burning wood. When he finally laid down
the tongs he remarked in a casual tone, 'I owe you an apology--will you
accept it?'

'What for?'

'You appear to have several counts against me--suppose we don't go into
details. I offer a collective apology.'

'Because you called me "the Wheat Princess"? Oh, yes, I'll excuse it; I
dare say you were justified.'

He leaned forward with a slight frown.

'Certainly I was not justified; it was neither kind nor gentlemanly,
and I am sorry that I said it. I can only promise to have better
manners in the future.'

Marcia dismissed the subject with a gesture.

'Let me tell you about the good your money has done.'

'No, please don't! I don't want to hear. I know that it's horrible, and
that you did the best with it possible. I'm glad if it helped. My
father is sending some wheat that will be here in a few weeks.'

'Miss Marcia,' he said slowly, 'I wish you wouldn't take this matter so
badly. Your uncle was out of his senses when he talked to you, and he
didn't realize what he was saying. He feels awfully cut up about it. He
told me to-night that he was afraid he had spoiled your summer, and
that he wouldn't have hurt you for the world.'

Marcia's eyes suddenly filled with tears and she bit her lip. Sybert
leaned forward and poked the fire.

'I should like to talk to you about your uncle,' he said, with his eyes
fixed on the embers. 'He is one of the finest men I have ever known.
And it is not often that a man in his position amounts to much--that
is, as a human being; the temptations are all the other way. Most men,
you know, with leisure and his tastes would--well, go in for collecting
carved ivory and hammered silver and all that rubbish. Nobody
understands what he is trying to do, least of all the people he is
doing it for. He does it very quietly and in his own way, and he
doesn't ask for thanks. Still, just a little appreciation would be
grateful; and, instead of that, he is abused at every turn. This wheat
business increased the feeling against him, and naturally he feels
sore. The other evening he'd just been reading some articles about the
trouble in a Roman paper, and I had been telling him about your
encounter with the village people when you came in. It was an
unfortunate moment you chose, and he forgot himself. I wish you would
be as kind to him as you can, for he has a good many critics outside,
and--' Sybert hesitated an instant--'he needs a little sympathy at
home.'

Marcia drew a deep breath.

'I understand about Uncle Howard,' she said. 'I used to think
sometimes--' she hesitated too--'that he wasn't very happy, but I
didn't know the reason. Of course I don't blame him for what he said; I
know he was worried, and I know he didn't mean it. In any case, I
should rather know the truth. But about the wheat,' she continued, 'my
father is not to blame the way you think he is. He and Uncle Howard
don't understand each other, but I understand them both, and if I had
known sooner I could have stopped it. He didn't have the remotest idea
of harming Italy or any other country. He just thought about getting
ahead of a lot of others, and--you know what men are like--making
people look up to him. He's very quick; he sees things faster than
other men; he knows what's going to happen ahead of time, and you can't
expect him not to take advantage of it. Of course'--she flushed--'he
wants to make money, too; but it isn't all that, for he doesn't use it
after he gets it made. It's the beating others that he likes--the power
it gives him. I'm afraid,' she added, with a slightly pathetic smile,
'that I shall have to go home and look after him.'

'Oh, certainly, Miss Marcia, we all know that your father had no
thought of deliberately harming Italy or any other country. And, as a
matter of fact, the American wheat corner has not had so much to do
with the trouble as the Italian government would have us believe. The
simple truth is that your father has been used as a scapegoat. While
the Roman papers have been suggestively silent on many points, they
have had much to say of the American Wheat King.'

'Have the things they said been very bad?'

Sybert smiled a trifle.

'There's not been much, to tell the truth, that he will care to cut out
and paste in his scrap-book.'

'Our party, next week, seems heartless, doesn't it--sort of like giving
a ball while the people next door are having a funeral? I wanted to
give it up, but Uncle Howard looked so hurt when I proposed it that I
didn't say anything more about it.'

'No, certainly not. That would be foolish and useless. Because some
people have to be unhappy is no reason why all should be.'

'I suppose not,' she agreed slowly; and then she added, 'The world used
to be so much pleasanter to live in before I knew there was any misery
in it--I wish I didn't have to know!'

'Miss Marcia, I told you the other day that it was a relief sometimes
to see people who are thoroughly, irresponsibly happy; who dance over
the pit without knowing it's there. A man who has been in the pit, who
knows all its horrors--who feels as if he reeked with them--likes
occasionally to see some one who doesn't even know of its existence.
And yet in the end do you think he can thoroughly respect such
blindness? Don't you feel that you are happier in a worthier sense when
you look at life with your eyes open; when you honestly take the bad
along with the good?'

She sat silent for a few minutes, apparently considering his words.
Presently he added--

'As for your party, I think you may dance with a free conscience.
You've done what you could to help matters on, and you'll do a great
deal more in the future.'

'I'm afraid that my conscience didn't have much to do with wanting to
give up the ball,' she acknowledged, with a slightly guilty laugh.
'It's simply that I can't bear to meet people, and feel that all the
time they're talking to me they're calling me in their minds "the Wheat
Princess."'

'That, I suppose you know, is very silly. It's the price you have to
pay, and I haven't much sympathy to offer. However, you need not let it
bother you; for, as a matter of fact, there will not be many men here,
who would not be wheat kings themselves if they had the chance--even
knowing beforehand all the suffering it was going to bring to this
trouble-ridden country. And now, suppose we don't talk about wheat any
more. You've thought about it a good deal too much.'

'You're not very optimistic,' she said.

'Oh, well, I'm not blind. It takes an Italian to be optimistic in this
country.'

'Do you like the Italians, or don't you?' she asked. 'Sometimes you
seem to, and sometimes you act as if you despised them.'

'Yes, certainly I like them; I was born in Italy.'

'But you're an American,' she said quickly.

He laughed at her tone.

'You surely want to be an American,' she insisted.

'As Henry James says, Miss Marcia, one's country, like one's
grandmother, is antecedent to choice.'

She studied the fire for some time without speaking, and Sybert,
leaning back lazily, studied her. Her next observation surprised him.

'You said the other day, Mr. Sybert, that every man lived for some
idea, and I've been wondering what yours was.'

A curious expression flashed over his face.

'You couldn't expect me to tell; I'm a diplomatist.'

'I have an idea that it is not very much connected with diplomacy.'

'In which case it would be poor diplomacy for me to give it away.'

'Mr. Sybert, you give a person a queer impression, as if you were
acting a part all the time, and didn't want people to know what you
were really like.'

'An anarchist must be careful; the police----'

'I believe you are one!' she cried.

'Don't be alarmed. I assure you I am not. But,' he added, with a little
flash of fire, 'I swear, in a country like this, one would like to
be--anything for action! Oh, I'm not a fool,' he added, in response to
her smile. 'We're living in the nineteenth century, and not in the
thirteenth. Anarchy belongs to the dark ages as much as feudalism.'

'You're so difficult to place! I like to know whether people are
Democrats or Republicans, and whether they are Presbyterians or
Episcopalians. Then one always knows where to find them, and is not in
danger of hurting their feelings.'

'I'm afraid I can't claim any such respectable connexions as those,'
Sybert laughed.

'Half the time one would think you were a Catholic by the way you stand
up for the priests; the other half one would think you weren't anything
by the way you abuse them.'

'This mania for classifying! What difference if a person calls himself
a Catholic or a Baptist, a Unitarian or a Buddhist? It's all one. A man
is not necessarily irreligious because he doesn't subscribe to any
cut-and-dried formulae.'

'Mr. Sybert,' she dared, 'I used to be terribly suspicious of you. I
knew you weren't just the way you appeared, and I thought you were
really rather bad; but I'm beginning to believe you're unusually good.'

'Oh, I say, Miss Marcia! What are you trying to get at? Do you want me
to confess to a hair shirt underneath my dinner-jacket?--I am afraid
you must leave that to our friend the monk, up on his mountain-top.'

'No, I didn't mean just that. Flagellations and hair shirts strike me
as a pretty useless sort of goodness.'

'It does seem a poor business,' he agreed, 'for a strong young fellow
like that to give up his whole life to the work of getting his soul
into paradise.'

'Still, if he wants paradise that much, and is willing to make the
sacrifice----'

'It's setting a pretty high value on his own soul. I should never rate
mine as being worth a lifetime of effort.'

'I suppose a person's soul is worth whatever price he chooses to set.'

'Oh, of course, if a man keeps his soul in a bandbox he can produce it
immaculate in the end; but what's a soul for if it's not for use? He
would much better live in the world with his fellow-men, and help them
keep their souls clean, even at the risk of getting his own a little
dusty.'

'Yes, perhaps that's true,' she conceded. 'Such dust will doubtless
brush off in the end.'

'It certainly ought, if things are managed right.'

'I can't help feeling sorry, though, for the poor young monk; he will
be so disappointed, when he brings out his shiny new soul, to find that
it doesn't rank any higher than some of the dusty ones that have been
dragged through the world.'

'It will serve him right,' Sybert declared. 'He ought to have been
thinking of other people's souls instead of his own.'

'"'Tis a dangerous thing to play with souls, and matter enough to save
one's own,"' quoted Marcia.

'Oh, well,' he shrugged, 'I won't argue, with the poet and the priests
both against me; but still----'

'You think that your speckled soul is exactly as good at other people's
white souls?'

'It all depends,' he demurred, 'upon how they kept theirs white and how
I got mine speckled.'

'Our frate has afforded a long moral,' she laughed.

'Ah--and I suspect he didn't deserve it. He looks, poor devil, as if
his heart were still in the world, in spite of the fact that he himself
is in the cloister.'

'In that case,' she returned, 'he's lost the world for nothing, for his
prayers will not be answered unless his heart is in them.'

'There's a tragedy!' said Sybert--'to have lost the world, and then, in
spite of it, to turn up in the end with a dusty soul!'

They looked at each other soberly, and then they both laughed.

'Philosophy is a queer thing,' said Marcia. 'You may go as far as you
please, but you always end where you started.'

'"Bubbles that glitter as they rise and break on vain philosophy's
aye-bubbling spring,"' he repeated softly, with his eyes on the fire;
and then he leaned toward her and laughed again. 'Miss Marcia, do you
know I have an idea?'

'What is it?' she asked.

'It's about you and me--I have a theory that we might be pretty good
friends.'

'I thought we'd been friends for some time,' she returned evasively. 'I
am sure my uncle's friends are mine.'

'Really, I hadn't suspected it! But it's the same with friends as with
politics and religion: they don't amount to much until you find them
for yourself.'

She considered this in silence.

'I should say,' he added, 'that we'd been pretty good enemies all this
time. What do you say to our being friends, for a change?'

Marcia glanced away in a sudden spasm of shyness.

'Shall we try it?' he asked in a low tone, bending toward her and
laying his hand palm upward on the arm of her chair.

She dropped her hand into his hesitatingly, and his fingers closed upon
it. He looked at the fire a moment, and then back in her face.

'Marcia,' he said softly, 'did you ever hear the Tuscan proverb, "The
foes of yesterday become the friends of to-day and the lovers of
to-morrow"?'

A quick wave of colour swept over her face, and a faint answering flush
appeared in his. She drew her hand away and rose to her feet, with a
light laugh that put the last few minutes ages away.

'I'm afraid it's getting late, and Aunt Katherine would be scandalized
if she found her malaria patient waiting up for her. I will leave you
to smoke in peace.'

Sybert rose and followed her into the hall. He chose a tall brass
candlestick from the row on the chimney-piece, lighted it, and handed
it to her with a silent bow.

'Thank you,' said Marcia, with a brief glance at his face. She paused
on the landing and looked down. He was standing on the rug at the foot
of the stairs, watching her with an amused smile.

'_Buona notte_, Signor Siberti,' she murmured.

'_Buona notte_, signorina,' he returned, with a little laugh. 'Pleasant
dreams!'




                             CHAPTER XVIII


'SHALL I do it high or low, ma'am?'

Marcia, who was sitting before the mirror in a lace camisole, fidgeted
impatiently.

'Oh, do it any way you please, Granton, only hurry--low, I think. That
will look best with my gown. But do be quick about it. I have to go
downstairs.'

'There's plenty of time,' replied the maid, imperturbably. 'But I would
be a little faster if you would kindly sit still.'

'Very well, Granton; I won't move for five minute. I'm really getting
excited, though; and I didn't care a bit for the party until it began.'

'Yes, ma'am. If you'll just turn your head a little more this way. It's
very early.'

'I know, but I have to go down and be sure that Pietro understands
about the lights. He's so stupid, he has to be watched every minute.
And, Granton, as soon as you get through with Mrs. Copley please go and
help Bianca dress Miss Royston. Bianca doesn't know anything more about
fixing hair than a rabbit.'

Granton's silence breathed acquiescence in this statement, and under
impulse of the implied compliment she became more sprightly in her
movements as she skilfully twisted Marcia's yellow-brown hair into a
seemingly simple coil at the nape of her neck.

For the past three days the house had been full of guests and though
Marcia had been somewhat cold in her anticipations of the time, she
found herself thoroughly enjoying it when it came. The days had been
filled with rides and drives and impromptu gaiety. Paul Dessart had
been master of the revels, and he filled the office brilliantly. He had
supplied the leaven of fun on every occasion, and had been so
thoroughly tactful that his host and hostess had gratefully blessed
him, and Marcia had cast him more than one involuntary glance of
approval. And this was her birthday and the night of the ball. All day
long she had been the centre of a congratulatory group, the recipient
of prettily worded felicitations; and she not unnaturally found it
pleasant. The afternoon train had brought still more guests from Rome,
and Villa Vivalanti's nineteen bedrooms were none too many. Five
o'clock tea on the terrace had in itself been in the nature of a festa,
with gaily dressed groups coming and going amid the sound of laughter
and low voices; while the excitable Italian servants scurried to and
fro, placing tea-tables and carrying cups.

Marcia had been secretly disappointed that afternoon by the non-arrival
of one guest whom she had half expected--and Eleanor Royston had been
frankly so.

'Mr. Copley,' Eleanor had inquired of her host, as he offered her a cup
of tea, 'where's that friend of yours, Mr. Laurence Sybert?'

'Quelling rioters, I presume. It's more in his line just now than
attending balls.'

'As if anything could be more in a diplomat's line than attending
balls! With all the other diplomats here and off their guard, it's just
the time to learn state secrets. And he's the most interesting man in
Rome,' she complained. 'I wanted to add him to my collection.'

'Your collection?' Mr. Copley's startled expression approached a stare.

'Of interesting men,' she explained. 'Oh, don't be alarmed; I don't
scalp them. The collection is purely mental--it's small enough, so far,
to be carried in my head. It's merely that I am a student of human
nature and am constantly on the alert for fresh specimens. Your Mr.
Sybert is puzzling; I don't know just how to classify him.'

'Ah, I see! It is merely a scientific interest you take in him.' Mr.
Copley's tone was one of relief. 'If I can be of any assistance with
the label--I am sure that he would feel honoured to grace your
collection.'

'I am not so sure,' said Marcia. 'Wait till you hear the others, Uncle
Howard! A Kansas politician who wants to be a poet, an engineer on the
Claytons' yacht, a Russian prince who talks seven languages and can't
express his thoughts in any, and--who were the others, Eleanor? Oh,
yes! the blacksmith who married the maid and beats her.'

'You don't do them justice,' Eleanor remonstrated, 'Those are merely
their accidental, extrinsic qualities. That which makes them
interesting is something intrinsic.'

Mr. Copley shot her an amused glance, and drawing up a chair, sat down
beside her, prepared to argue it out.

'The list has possibilities, Miss Royston,' he assured her, 'though of
course one can't judge without knowing the gentlemen personally. With
which one, may I ask, are you going to classify Mr. Sybert?'

'Oh, in a separate pigeonhole by himself. That is just what makes my
collection interesting.' It was evidently a subject that she discussed
with some relish. 'Most men, you know--you look them over and
immediately assign them to a group with a lot of others; but once in a
while you come across a man who goes entirely by himself--is what the
French call an _original_--and he is worth studying.'

Mr. Copley took out a cigarette and regarded it speculatively. 'I see,'
he said. 'The best study of mankind is man--and so you think Sybert a
specimen who deserves a pigeonhole by himself?'

'Yes, I think he does, though I haven't quite decided on the hole yet.
That's why it worries me that he didn't come to the party. One hates to
leave these little matters unsolved.'

'I am sincerely sorry for you to have lost the opportunity. I must tell
him your opinion.'

'No, indeed!' remonstrated Eleanor. 'I may meet him again some day, and
if you tell him I shall never learn the truth. One's only chance is to
catch them unawares.'

'You're a very penetrating person, Miss Royston.'

'I've been out nine seasons,' she laughed. 'You can trust me to know a
man when I see one!'

'I wish you'd teach Marcia some of your lore,' he murmured, as he
turned toward the loggia to greet a fresh carriageful of guests.

Even though one man were missing, still a great many others were there,
and it had only been an undercurrent of Marcia's consciousness in any
case that had considered the matter. The laughter and babel of voices,
the gay preparations and hurrying servants, had had their effect. As
Granton clasped about her neck Mr. Copley's expiatory gift--a copy of
an old Etruscan necklace in pearls and uncut emeralds set in hammered
gold--she was as pleasurably excited as a young woman may legitimately
be on the eve of a birthday ball.

'There, Granton; that's all,' she cried, catching up her very Parisian
skirts and flying for the door. 'Hurry with the others, please, for it
won't be long before the guests begin coming.'

She started downstairs, pulling on her gloves as she went. She paused a
moment on the landing to view the scene below, and she blinked once or
twice as it dawned upon her that Laurence Sybert was standing at the
foot of the stairs watching her, just as he had stood the last time she
had seen him when he bade her good-night. For a moment she felt an
absurd tremor run through her, and then with something like a gulp she
collected herself and went on down to greet him.

'Mr. Sybert! We were afraid you weren't coming. When did you get here?'

'On the late train. I have been in the south, and I didn't get back to
the city till this afternoon.'

'Your arrivals are always so spectacular,' she said. 'We entirely give
you up, and then the first thing we know you are quietly standing
before us on the rug.'

'I should call that the reverse of spectacular.'

'Have you seen Uncle Howard? Did they find any place to put you? The
house is _cram_ full.'

'Oh, yes, I've been officially welcomed. I have a bed in your uncle's
dressing-room.'

'You may be thankful for that. The next comer, I am afraid, will be put
in the cellar.'

Sybert did not choose to prolong these amenities of welcome any
further, and he stood quietly watching her while she buttoned her
gloves. She looked very radiant to-night, with the candle-light
gleaming on her hair and her hazel eyes shining with excitement. Her
gown was the filmiest, shimmering white with an undertone of green.
About her neck the pearls gleamed whitely, each separate jewel a
pulsing globe of light. Marcia glanced up and touched the necklace with
her hand.

'This is Uncle Howard's birthday present,' she said. 'Isn't it lovely?
It's a copy of an old, old necklace in Castellani's collection. My
uncle gives me pearls, and my father is sending wheat.'

She turned aside into the long salon, and Sybert followed her. If
Marcia had been momentarily jostled from her self-possession by his
sudden appearance, she had completely regained her poise. She was
buoyantly at her ease again. There was a touch of intimacy, almost of
coquetry, about her manner as she talked; and yet--Sybert noted the
fact with a sub-smile of comprehension--she avoided crossing eyes with
him. That moment by the fireside was still too vivid. They returned to
the hall, and Marcia stepped to the door leading on to the loggia. The
cornice was outlined with tiny coloured lamps, while a man was lighting
others by the terrace balustrade. She glanced back at Sybert, who was
standing still in the hall.

'You aren't going out?' he asked.

'Just a moment. I want to see how it looks.'

He looked at her bare shoulders with a slight frown. 'Bring the
signorina a wrap,' he said to the servant at the door.

'I don't need a wrap,' said Marcia; 'it's a warm night.'

Sybert shook his head with an expression that was familiar.

'Oh, if you wish to say anything, say it!' she cried. 'Only please
don't look at me with that smile. It's the way you looked the first
time I saw you--and I don't like it.'

'I have nothing to say. When a young woman threatened with malaria
proposes to go out into an Italian night, bare-shouldered, a mere man
is left speechless.'

'Pride would keep me warm.'

'I haven't a doubt of it; but in case it should for the moment
fail----' He took the long white cloak from the man's arm and glanced
at it with another expression as he placed it on her shoulders. It was
composed mostly of chiffon and lace.

'All is vanity that comes from a Paris shop!' laughed Marcia.

Sybert lit a cigarette and followed her. 'Well?' he asked, as they
paused by the terrace balustrade. 'Does it meet with your approval?'

'It's lovely, isn't it?' she replied as she looked back at the broad,
white facade with its gleaming windows. There was no moon, but a clear,
star-sprinkled sky. In all the dark landscape the villa alone was a
throbbing centre of life and light. Rows of coloured lanterns were
beginning to outline the avenue leading to the gate, and in the ilex
grove tiny red and blue and white bulbs glowed among the branches like
the blossoms of some tropical night-blooming cereus. Servants were
hurrying past the windows, musicians were commencing to tune their
instruments; everywhere was the excitement of preparation.

'And this is your birthday,' he said. 'I suppose you have received many
pretty speeches to-day, Miss Marcia; I hope they may all come true.'
She glanced up in his face, and he looked down with a smile.
'Twenty-three is a great age!'

A shadow flitted across her face. 'Isn't it?' she sighed. 'I thought
twenty-two was bad enough--but twenty-three! It won't be many years
before I'll be really getting old.'

Sybert laughed. 'It's been a long time since I saw twenty-three--when I
first came back to Rome.'

'Twelve years,' said Marcia.

'It's an easy enough problem if you care to work it out. I don't care
to, any more.'

'It's not bad for a man,' she said; 'but a woman grows old so young!'

'You need not worry over that just now. The grey hairs will not come
for some time yet.'

'I'm not worrying,' she laughed. 'I was just thinking--it isn't nice to
grow old, is it?'

'Certainly not. It's the great tragedy of life; and it comes to all,
Miss Marcia--to you as well as to the poorest peasant girl in Castel
Vivalanti. Life, after all, contains some justice.'

Marcia turned her back to the shining villa and looked down over the
great Campagna stretching away darkly under the stars, with here and
there the gleam of a shepherd's fire, built to ward off the poison in
the air.

'Things are not very just,' she said slowly.

'Not very,' he agreed; 'and one has little faith that they ever will
be--either in this world or the next.'

'It would be comfortable, wouldn't it, if you could only believe that
people are unfortunate as a punishment--because they deserve to be.'

'It would be a beautiful belief, but one which you can scarcely hold in
Italy.'

'Poor Italy!' she sighed.

'Ah--poor Italy!' he echoed.

With a sudden motion he threw away his cigarette over the balustrade
and immediately lit another. Marcia watched his face in the flare of
the match. The eyes seemed deeper-set than usual, the jaw more boldly
marked, and there were nervous lines about the mouth. His face seemed
to have grown thinner in the last few weeks.

They turned away and sauntered toward the ilex grove.

'There are, however, compensations,' he went on presently. 'Our poor
peasants do not have all the pleasures, but they do not have all the
pains, either. There are a great many girls in Castel Vivalanti who
will never have a birthday ball'--he glanced from the lighted villa
behind them to the glowing vista in front, the green stretch of the
ilex walk with the shimmering fountain at the end--'whose lives will be
very bare, indeed. They will work and eat and sleep, and love and
perhaps hate, and that is all. You have many other pleasures which they
could never understand. You enjoy the _Egoist_, for instance. But
also'--he paused--'you can suffer many things they cannot understand.
You are an individual, while they are merely human beings. Gervasio's
stepmother married a husband, and doubtless loved him very much and
cried for him a week after he was dead. Then she married another, and
saw no difference between him and the first. She may have to work hard,
and she may be hungry sometimes, but she will escape the worst
suffering in life, which you, with all your privileges, may not escape,
Marcia.'

'One would rather not escape it,' she answered. 'I should rather feel
what there is to feel.'

'Ah!' he breathed, 'so should we all! And these poor devils of
peasants, who can't feel anything but their hunger and weariness, lose
the most of life. They are not even human beings; they are merely
beasts of burden, hard-working, patient, unthinking oxen, who go the
way they are driven, not dreaming of their strength. That is the
unfairness; that is where society owes them a debt; they have no chance
to develop. However,' he broke off with a short laugh, 'it's not the
time to bother you with other people's troubles--on your birthday
night. We will hope, after all, that you may not have any very grave
ones of your own.'

They had reached the fountain and they paused. They were alone in a
fairy grove, with a nightingale pouring out his soul in the branches
above their heads. Marcia stood looking down the dim, green alley they
had come by, breathing deeply. She knew that Sybert's eyes were on her,
and slowly she raised her head and looked up in his face. For a moment
they stood in silence; then, as the sound of carriage wheels reached
them from the avenue, she started and turned away.

'The people are beginning to come. I am afraid that Aunt Katherine will
be wondering where I am,' she said in a voice that trembled slightly.

Sybert followed her in silence.

Some one had once said to her that Sybert's silences meant more than
other men's words, and as they turned back she tried to think who it
had been. Ah--she remembered! It was the contessa.




                              CHAPTER XIX


THROUGHOUT the evening while she was laughing and talking with the
stream of guests, Marcia kept a sub-conscious notion of Sybert's
movements. She saw him in the hall exchanging jokes with the English
ambassador. She saw him talking to Eleanor Royston and bending over the
Contessa Torrenieri. And once, as she whirled past in a waltz, she
caught sight of his dark face in a doorway with his eyes fixed on her,
and she forgave him Eleanor and the contessa. She was conscious all the
time of a secret amazement at herself. Sybert had suddenly become for
her the only person in the room, and while she was outwardly intent
upon what other men were saying, her mind was filled with the picture
of his face as he had looked during that silent moment by the fountain.
She went through the evening in a maze, conscious only of the approach
of the one dance she had with him.

When the evening was nearing its end she was suddenly brought to her
senses by the realization that she was strolling down one of the ilex
walks with Paul Dessart at her side. She had been rattling on
unheedingly, and she scarcely knew how they had come there. Her first
instinct was one of self-preservation; she felt what was coming, and
she wanted to ward it off. Anything to get back to the crowd again! She
paused and looked back at the lighted villa, listening to the sound of
the violins rising above the murmur of voices and laughter. For a
moment she almost felt impelled to turn and run. Since she had stopped,
Paul stopped perforce, and looked at her questioningly.

'I--I think we'd better go back,' she stammered. 'This dance is almost
over, and----'

'We won't go back just yet,' he returned. 'I want to talk to you. You
owe me a few moments, Marcia. Come here and sit down and listen to what
I have to say.'

He turned into the little circle by the fountain and motioned toward a
garden seat. Marcia dropped limply upon it and looked at him with an
air of pleading. There was no circumlocution; both knew that the time
had come when everything must be said, and Paul went to the point.

'Well, Marcia, are you going to marry me?'

Marcia sat opening and shutting her fan nervously, trying to frame an
answer that would not hurt him.

'I've been patient; I haven't bothered you. You surely ought to know
your own mind now. You've had a month--it hasn't been exactly a happy
month for me. Tell me, please, Marcia. Don't keep me waiting any
longer.'

'Oh, Paul!' she said, looking back with half-frightened eyes. 'It's all
a mistake.'

'A mistake! What do you mean? Marcia, I trusted you. You can't throw me
over now. Tell me quickly!'

'Forgive me, Paul,' she faltered miserably. 'I--I was mistaken. I
thought, that day in the cloister----'

He realized that, somehow, she was slipping away from him and that he
must fight to get her back. He bent toward her and took her hand, with
his glowing, eager face close to hers, his words coming so fast that he
fairly stuttered.

'Yes, that day in the cloister. You did care for me then, didn't you,
Marcia--just a little bit? You let me hope--you told me there wasn't
any other man--you've been kind to me ever since. That's what I've
lived on this whole month--the memory of that afternoon. Tell me what
the trouble is--don't let anything come between us. We've had such a
happy spring--let it keep on being happy. We've lived in Arcady,
Marcia--you and I. Why should we ever leave it? Why must we go
back--why not go forward? If you cared that afternoon, you can care
now. I haven't changed. Tell me why you hesitate. I don't want to force
you to make up your mind, but this uncertainty is simply hell.'

Marcia listened, breathing fast, half carried away by the impetuous
flow of his words. She sat watching him with troubled eyes and silent
lips in a sort of stupor. She could not collect her thoughts
sufficiently to answer him. What had she to say? she asked herself
wildly. What could she say that was adequate?

Paul, bending forward, his eyes close to hers, was waiting expectantly,
insistently, for her to speak, when suddenly they were startled by a
step on the gravel path before them, and they both looked up to see
Laurence Sybert, cigarette in hand, stroll around the corner of the
ilex walk. As his eye fell upon them he stopped like a man shot, and
for a breathless instant the three faced one another. Then, with a
quick rigidity of his whole figure, he bowed an apology and wheeled
about. Marcia turned from red to white and snatched her hand away.

Paul watched her a moment with an angry light growing in his eyes. 'You
are in love with Laurence Sybert!' he whispered.

Marcia shrank back in the corner and hid her face against the back of
the seat. Paul bent over her.

'Look at me,' he cried; 'tell me it's not true. You can't do it! You've
been deceiving me. You've been lying! Oh, yes, I know you've been very
careful not to make any promises in so many words, but you've made them
in other ways, and I believed you. I've been fool enough to think you
in earnest, and all the time you've been amusing yourself!'

Marcia raised her eyes to his. 'Paul, I haven't. You are mistaken. I
don't know how I've changed; I can't explain. That day in the cloister
I thought I liked you very much. And if Margaret hadn't come in,
perhaps--I wouldn't have deceived you for a moment, and you know it.'

'Tell me you don't love Sybert.'

'Paul, you have no right----'

'I have no right! You said there was no one else, and I believed you;
and now, when I ask for an explanation, you tell me to go about my
business. I suppose you were beginning to get tired of me these last
few days, and thought----'

'You have no _right_ to talk to me this way! I haven't meant to deceive
you. You asked me if there were any one else, and I told you there was
not, and it was true. I'm sorry--sorry to hurt you, but it's better to
find it out now.'

Paul rose to his feet with a very hard laugh.

'Oh, yes, decidedly it's better to find it out now. It would have been
still better if you had found it out sooner.'

He turned his back and kicked the coping of the fountain viciously.
Marcia crossed over to him and touched him on the arm.

'Paul,' she said, 'I can't let it end so. I know I have been very much
to blame, but not as you think. I liked you so much.'

He turned and saw the tears in her eyes, and his anger vanished.

'Oh, I know. I've no business to speak so--but--I'm naturally cut up,
you know. Don't cry about it; you can't help it. If you don't love me,
you don't, and that ends the matter. I'll get over it, Marcia.' He
smiled a trifle bleakly. 'I'm not the fellow to sit down and cry when I
can't have what I want. I've gone without things before.' He offered
her his arm. 'We'll go back now; I'm afraid you're missing your dances.'

Marcia barely touched his arm, and they turned back without speaking.
He led her into the hall, and bowing with his eyes on the floor, turned
back out of doors. She laughed and chatted her way through two or three
groups before she could reach the stairs and escape to her own room,
where she locked the door and sank down on the floor by the couch.
Trouble was beginning for her sooner than she had thought, and
underneath the remorse and pity she felt for Paul, the thing that lay
like lead on her heart was the look on Sybert's face as he turned away.

A knock presently came on the door, followed by a rattling of the knob.

'Marcia, Marcia!' called Eleanor Royston. 'Are you in there?' Marcia
raised her head and listened in silence.

The knock came again. She rose and went to the door.

'What do you want?' she asked.

'I want to come in. It's I--Eleanor. Open the door. Why don't you come
down?'

Marcia shook out her rumpled skirts, pushed back her hair, and opened
the door.

'Everybody's asking for you. The ambassador says you were engaged to
him for a---- Why, what's the matter?'

Marcia drew back quickly into the shadow, and Eleanor stepped in and
closed the door behind her.

'What's the matter, child?' she inquired again. 'You've been crying!
Has Paul----?' she asked suddenly. Eleanor's intuitive faculties were
abnormally developed. 'I suppose he was pretty nasty,' she proceeded,
taking Marcia's answer for granted. 'He can be on occasion. But, to
tell you the truth, I think he has some cause to be. I think you
deserve all you got.'

Marcia sank into a chair with a gesture of weariness, and Eleanor
walked about the room handling the ornaments.

'Oh, I knew he was in love with you. There's nothing subtle about Paul.
He wears his heart on his sleeve, if any one ever did. But if you don't
mind my saying so, Marcia, I think you've been playing with rather a
high hand. It's hardly legitimate, you know, to deliberately set out to
make a man fall in love with you.'

'I haven't been playing. I didn't mean to.'

'Oh, nonsense! Men don't fall in love without a little encouragement;
and I'm not blind--I've been watching you. If you want my honest
opinion, I think you've been pretty unfair with Paul.'

'I know it,' Marcia said miserably; 'you can't blame me any worse than
I blame myself. But you just can't love people if you don't.'

'I'm not blaming you for not loving him; it's for his loving you. That,
by using a little foresight, might have been avoided. However, I don't
know that I'm exactly the person to preach.' Eleanor dropped into a
chair with a short laugh, and leaned forward with her chin in her hand
and her eyes on Marcia's face. 'I have a theory, Marcia--it's more than
a theory: it's a superstition,--that some day we'll be paid in our own
coin. I'm twenty-eight, and a good many men have thought they were in
love with me, while I myself have never managed to fall in love with
any of them. But I'm going to, some day--hard--and then either he's not
going to care about me or something's going to be in the way so that we
can't marry. It's going to be a tragedy. I know it as well as I know
I'm sitting here. I'm going to pay for my nine seasons, and with
interest. It makes me reckless; the score is already so heavy against
me that a few more items don't count. But I know my tragedy's coming,
and the longer I put it off the worse it's going to be. It's a nice
superstition; I'll share it with you, Marcia.'

Marcia smiled rather sorrily. It was not a superstition she cared to
have thrust upon her just then. She was divining it for herself, and
did not need Eleanor to put it into words.

'As for Paul, you couldn't do anything else, of course. You're not
fitted to each other for a moment, and you'll grow more unfitted every
day. Paul needs some one who is more objective--who doesn't think too
much--some one like--well, like Margaret, for instance. In the
meantime, you needn't worry; he'll manage to survive it.' She rose with
another laugh and stood over Marcia's chair. 'It's over and done with,
and can't be helped; there's nothing to cry about. But mark my words,
Marcia Copley, you'll be falling in love yourself some day, and then
I--Paul will be avenged. Meanwhile there are several years before you
in which you can have a very good time. Come on; we must go downstairs.
The people will be leaving in a little while. Bathe your eyes, and I'll
fix your hair.'

Marcia went downstairs and laughed and danced and talked again, and
once she almost stopped in the middle of a speech to wonder how she
could do it. It was finally with heartfelt thankfulness that she
watched the people beginning to leave. Once, as she was bidding a group
good night, she caught sight of Sybert in the hall bending over the
contessa's hand. She covertly studied his face, but it was more darkly
inscrutable than ever. She slipped upstairs as soon as the last
carriage had rolled away; it was not until long after the sunlight had
streamed into her windows, however, that she finally closed her eyes.
Eleanor Royston's pleasant 'superstition' she was pondering very
earnestly.




                               CHAPTER XX


THE ball ended, the guests gone, Villa Vivalanti forgot its one burst
of gaiety, and settled down again to its usual state of peaceful
somnolence. The days were growing warmer. White walls simmering in the
sunshine, fragrant garden borders resonant with the hum of insects, the
cool green of the ilex grove, the sleepy, slow drip of the fountain--it
was all so beautifully Italian, and so very, very lonely! During the
hot mid-days Marcia would sit by the ruins of the old villa or pace the
shady ilex walks with her feelings in a tumult. She had seen neither
Paul Dessart nor Laurence Sybert since the evening of her birthday, and
that moment by the fountain when the three had faced each other
silently was not a pleasant memory. It was one, however, which recurred
many times a day.

Of Sybert Marcia heard no news whatever. In reply to her casual
question as to when he would be at the villa again, her uncle had
remarked that just at present Sybert had more important things to think
of than taking a villeggiatura in the Sabine hills. But of Paul Dessart
and the Roystons most unexpected news had come. Paul's father had had
an 'attack' brought on by overwork, and they were all of them going
home. The letters were written on the train _en route_ for Cherbourg; a
long letter from Margaret, a short one from Eleanor. The latter
afforded some food for reflection, but the reflection did not bring
enlightenment.

        'DEAR MARCIA' (it ran):

        'I am sorry not to see you again, and (to be quite
        frank) I am equally sorry not to have seen Mr. Sybert
        again. I feel that if I had had more time, and half a
        chance, I might have accomplished something in the
        interests of science.

        'Margaret told you, of course, that Paul is going back
        with us. We hope his father's illness isn't serious,
        but he preferred to go. There is nothing to keep him in
        Rome, he says. Poor fellow! you must write him a nice
        letter. Don't worry too much about him, though; he
        won't blow his brains out.

        'I _could_ tell you something. I have just the tiniest
        suggestion of a suspicion which--granted fair winds and
        a prosperous voyage--may arrive at the dignity of news
        by the time we reach the other side. However, you don't
        deserve to hear it, and I shan't tell. Have I aroused
        your curiosity sufficiently? If so, _c'est tout_.

        'I shall hope to see you in Pittsburg this autumn.
        That, my dear Marcia, is merely a polite phrase and is
        not strictly true. I shall hope, rather, to see you in
        Paris or Rome or Vienna. I am afraid that I have the
        wander-habit to the end. The world is too big for one
        to settle down permanently in one place--and that place
        Pittsburg; is it not so? One can never be happy for
        thinking of all the things that are happening in all of
        the places where one is not.

        _'Au revoir_, then, till autumn; we'll play on the
        Champs-Elysees together.

                                                 'ELEANOR.'

A letter had come also from Marcia's father, which put her in an
uncomfortably unsettled frame of mind. It was written in the Copley
vein of humorous appreciation of the situation; but, for all that, she
could see underneath that she had hurt him. He disavowed all knowledge
and culpability in the Triple Alliance and the Abyssinian war. He
regretted the fact that the taxes were heavy, but he had had no hand in
making up Italy's financial budget. As to wheat, there were many
reasons why Italy could not afford it, aside from the fact that it was
dear. Marcia could give what she wished to the peasants to make up for
her erring father, and he inclosed a blank cheque to her order--surely
an excessive sign of penitence on the part of a business man. The
letter closed with the statement that he was lonely without her, and
that she must come back to America next winter and keep her old father
out of mischief.

She read the last few sentences over twice, with a rising lump in her
throat. It was true. Poor man, he must be lonely! She ought to have
tried to take her mother's place, and to have made a home for him
before now. Her duty suddenly presented itself very clearly, and it
appeared as uninviting as duties usually do. A few months before she
would not have minded, but now Italy had got its hold upon her. She did
not wish to go; she wished only to sit in the sunshine, happy,
unthinking, and let the days slip idly by. A picture flashed over her
of what the American life would be--a brownstone house on Fifth Avenue
in the winter, a country place in the Berkshires in the summer; an aunt
of her mother's for chaperon, her father's friends--lawyers and bankers
and brokers who talked railroads and the Stock Exchange; for interests
she would have balls and receptions, literary clubs and charities.
Marcia breathed a doleful sigh. Her memories of the New York house were
dreary; it was not a life she cared to renew. But nothing of all this
did she let her father know. She sent a gracefully forgiving letter,
with the promise that she would come home for the winter, and not a
hint that the home-coming was not her own desire.

It seemed that, things having once commenced to change, everything was
going. Mr. Copley himself exploded the next bombshell. He came back
from Rome one night with the announcement that the weather was getting
pretty hot, and the family ought to leave next week for Switzerland.

'Oh, Uncle Howard, not yet!' Marcia cried. 'Let us wait until the end
of June. It isn't too hot till then. Up here in the hills it's pleasant
all summer. I don't want to leave the villa.'

'Rome is hot just now in more ways than one,' he returned. 'I'd feel
safer to have you in Switzerland or up in the Tyrol during the
excitement. Goodness only knows what's going to happen next. I'm
expecting to wake up in the middle of a French revolution every
morning, and I should like to have you out of the country before the
beheading begins.'

'There isn't really any danger of a revolution?' she asked breathlessly.

'Not in a country where every other man's a soldier and the
government's in command. But there have been houses broken into and a
good many acts of lawlessness, and we're rather lonely off here.'

'I hate to think of going away,' Marcia sighed. 'We'll come back in the
autumn, won't we, Uncle Howard?'

'Oh, yes, if you like. I dare say we could manage a month or so out
here before we go into the palazzo for the winter.'

'And I'll be going back to America for the winter,' she sighed.

He looked at her with a slight smile.

'Are you the girl, Marcia, who used to preach sermons to your uncle
about Americans living abroad?'

Marcia reflected his smile somewhat wanly.

'And I'm practising my own preaching, am I not?'

'Oh, well,' he said, 'when the time comes you can do as you please.
Your father can get along without you one year more.'

'No, I think I ought to go, for of course he must be lonely but--I
should like to stay! It seems more like home than any place I've ever
been in. I've really never _belonged_ anywhere before, and I like so
much to be with you.'

'Poor little girl! You have had a chequered career.'

'Yes, Uncle Howard, I have; and it keeps on being chequered! I haven't
been in the villa three months, but really I don't remember ever having
lived so long in one place before. It's been nice, hasn't it? I hate
dreadfully to have it end. It seems like shutting away a whole part of
my life that can never come back.'

'Oh, well, if you feel that way about it, I'll buy the villa and we can
come out every spring. You can bring your father over, and we will dip
him in the waters of Lethe, too.'

'I'm afraid he wouldn't be dipped,' she laughed. 'He'd be running a
cable connexion out here and setting up a ticker on the terrace, so
that he could watch the stock market as well as the view.'

Mr. Copley's mouth twitched slightly at the picture.

'We must all ride our hobbies, I suppose, or the world would be a very
dreary world indeed.'

She looked up at him and hesitated.

'Uncle Howard, do you and papa--that is--do you mind my asking?--are
you very good friends?'

Mr. Copley frowned a moment without replying. 'Well Marcia, he's a good
deal older than I, and we're not particularly congenial.' He
straightened his shoulders with a laugh. 'Oh, well, there's no use
concealing disagreeable truths. It appears they will out in the end. As
a matter of fact, your father and I haven't had anything to do with
each other for the past ten years. The first move was on his part, when
he wrote about you last fall--you didn't know that you came as an
olive-branch, did you?'

'I didn't know; he didn't tell me anything about it, but I--well, I
sort of guessed. I'm sorry about it, Uncle Howard. I'm sure that it's
just because you don't understand each other.'

'I'm afraid we never have understood each other, and I doubt if we ever
can, but we'll make another effort.'

'It's so hard to like people when you don't understand them, and so
easy when you do,' said Marcia.

'It facilitates matters,' he agreed.

'I think I'm beginning to understand Mr. Sybert,' she added somewhat
vaguely. 'He's different, when you understand him, from the way you
thought he was when you didn't understand him.'

'Ah, Sybert!' Mr. Copley raised his head and brought his eyes back from
the edge of the landscape. 'I thought I knew him, but he's been a
revelation to me this spring.'

'How do you mean?' Marcia asked, striving to keep out of her tone the
interest that was behind it.

'Oh, the way he's taken hold of things. It seems an absurd thing to
say, but I believe he's had almost as much influence as the police in
quieting the trouble. He has an unbelievably strong hold on the
people--how he got it, I don't know. He understands them as well as an
Italian, and yet he is a foreigner, which gives him, in some ways, a
great advantage. They trust him because they think that, being a
foreigner, he has nothing to make out of it. He's a marvellous fellow
when it comes to action.'

'You never would guess it to look at him!' she returned. 'Why does he
pretend to be so bored?'

'Be so bored? Well, I suppose there are some things that do bore him;
and the ones that don't, bore other people. His opinions are not
universally popular in Rome, and being a diplomatist, I dare say he
thinks it as well to keep them to himself.'

'What are his opinions?' she asked tentatively. 'I don't like to accuse
him of being an anarchist, since he assures me that he's not. But when
a man wants to overthrow the government----'

'Nonsense! Sybert doesn't want to overthrow the government any more
than I do. Just at present it's under the control of a few corrupt
politicians, but that's a thing that's likely to happen in any country,
and it's only a temporary evil. The Italians will be on their feet
again in a year or so, all the better for their shaking-up, and Sybert
knows it. He's got more real faith in the government than most of the
Italians I know.'

'But he talks against it terribly.'

'Well, he sees the evil. He's been looking at it pretty closely, and he
knows it's there; and when Sybert feels a thing he feels it strongly.
But,' Copley smiled, 'while he says things himself against the country,
you'll find he'll not let any one else say them.'

'What do people think about him now--being mixed up in all these riots?'

'Oh, just now he's mixed up in the right side, and the officials are
very willing to pat him on the back. But as for the populace, I'm
afraid he's not making himself over-liked. They have a most immoral
tendency to sympathize with the side that's against the law, and they
can't understand their friends not sympathizing with the same side.
It's a pretty hard thing for him to have to tell these poor fellows to
be quiet and go back to their work and starve in silence.' Copley
sighed and folded his arms. 'I am sorry, Marcia, you don't like Sybert
better. There are not many like him.'

Marcia let the observation pass without comment.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, as Mrs. Copley and Marcia were sitting on the loggia
listlessly engaged with books and embroidery, there came whirring down
the avenue the contessa's immaculate little victoria, with the yellow
coronet emblazoned on the sides, with the coachman and footman in the
Torrenieri livery, green with yellow pipings. It was a gay little
affair; it matched the contessa. She stepped out, pretty and debonair,
in a fluttering pale-green summer gown, and ran forward to the loggia
with a little exclamation of distress.

'_Cara signora, signorina_, I am desolated! We must part! Is it not
sad? I go with Bartolomeo' (Bartolomeo was the count) 'to plant olive
orchards on his estate in the Abruzzi. Is it not lonely, that--to spend
the summer in an empty castle on the top of a mountain, with only a
view for company? And my friends at the baths or the lakes or in
Switzerland, or--oh, everywhere except on my mountain-top!'

Marcia laughed at the contessa's despair.

'But why do you go, contessa, if you do not like it?' she inquired.

'But my husband likes it. He has a passion for farming; after roulette,
it it his chief amusement. He is very pastoral--Bartolomeo. He adores
the mountain and the view and the olive orchards. And in Italy,
signorina, the wife has to do as the husband wishes.'

'I'm afraid the wives have to do that the world over, contessa.'

'Ah, no, signorina, you cannot tell me that; I have seen. In America
the husband does as the wife wishes. It is a beautiful country, truly.
You have many charming customs. Yes, I will give you good advice: you
will be wise to marry an American. They do not like mountain-tops. But
perhaps you will visit me on my mountain-top?' she asked. 'The
view--ah, the beautiful view! It is not so bad.'

'I'm afraid not, contessa. We are leaving for the Tyrol ourselves a
week from to-morrow.'

'So soon! Every one is going. Truly, the world comes to an end next
week in Rome.'

Marcia found herself growing unexpectedly cordial toward their guest;
even the contessa appeared suddenly dear as she was about to be
snatched away. She bade her an almost affectionate farewell, and stood
by the balustrade waving her handkerchief until the carriage
disappeared.

'Will marvels never cease?' she asked her aunt. 'I think--I really
think that I like the contessa!'




                              CHAPTER XXI


THE next day--it was just a week before their proposed trip to the
Tyrol--Marcia accompanied her uncle into Rome for the sake of one or
two important errands which might not be intrusted to a man's uncertain
memory. Mr. Copley found himself unready to return to the villa on the
train they had planned to take, and, somewhat to Marcia's
consternation, he carried her off to the Embassy for tea. She mounted
the steps with a fast-beating heart. Would Laurence Sybert be there?
She had not so much as seen him since the night of her birthday ball,
and the thought of facing him before a crowd, with no chance to explain
away that awful moment by the fountain, was more than disconcerting.

Her first glance about the room assured her that he was not in it, and
the knowledge carried with it a mingled feeling of relief and
disappointment. The air was filled with an excited buzz of
conversation, the talk being all of riots and rumours of riots. Marcia
drifted from one group to another, and finally found herself sitting on
a window-seat beside a woman whose face was familiar, but whom for the
moment she could not place.

'You don't remember me, Miss Copley?' her companion smiled.

Marcia looked puzzled. 'I was trying to place you,' she confessed. 'I
remember your face.'

'One day, early this spring, at Mr. Dessart's studio----'

'To be sure! The lady who writes!' she laughed. 'I never caught your
name.'

'And the worst gossip in Rome? Ah, well, they slandered me, Miss
Copley. One is naturally interested in the lives of the people one is
interested in--but for the others! They may make their fortunes and
lose them again, and get married, and elope and die, for all the
attention I ever give.'

Marcia smiled at her concise summary of the activities of life, and put
her down as a Frenchwoman.

'And the villa in the hills?' she asked. 'How did it go? And the ghost
of the Wicked Prince? Did Monsieur Benoit paint him?'

'The ghost was a grievous disappointment. He turned out to be the
butler.'

'Ah--poor Monsieur Benoit! He has many disappointments. _C'est triste,
n'est-ce pas?_'

'Many disappointments?' queried Marcia, quite in the dark.

'The Miss Roystons, Mr. Dessart's relatives,' pursued the lady; 'they
are friends of yours. I met them at the Melvilles' a few weeks ago.
They are charming, are they not?'

'Very,' said Marcia, wondering slightly at the turn the conversation
had taken.

'And this poor Monsieur Benoit--he has gone, all alone, to paint
moonlight in Venice. _Ce que c'est que l'amour!_'

'Ah!' breathed Marcia. She was beginning to have an inkling. Had he
been added to the collection? It was too bad of Eleanor!

'Miss Royston is charming, like all Americans,' reiterated the lady.
'But, I fear, a little cruel. _Mais n'importe._ He is young, and when
one is young one's heart is made of india-rubber, is it not so?' Her
eyes rested on Marcia for a moment.

Marcia's glance had wandered toward the door. Laurence Sybert had just
come in and joined the group about her uncle, and she noted the fact
with a quick thrill of excitement. Would he come and speak to her? What
would he say? How would he act? She felt a strong desire to study his
face, but she was aware that the eyes of 'the greatest gossip in Rome'
were upon her, and she rallied herself to answer. Monsieur Benoit was
commiserated for the third time.

'Ah, well,' finished the lady, philosophically, 'perhaps it is for the
best. A young man _avec le coeur brise_ is far more interesting than one
who is heart-whole. There is that Laurence Sybert over there.' She
nodded toward the group on the other side of the room. 'For the last
ten years, when the _forestieri_ in Rome haven't had anything else to
talk about, they've talked about him. And all because they think that
under that manner of his he's carrying around a broken heart for the
pretty little Contessa Torrenieri.'

Marcia laughed lightly. 'Mr. Sybert at least carries his broken heart
easily. One would never suspect its presence.'

The lady's eyes rested upon her an appreciable instant before she
answered: '_Che vuole?_ People must have something to talk about, and a
good many girls--yes, and with _dots_--have sighed in vain for a smile
from his dark eyes. Between you and me, I don't believe the man's got
any heart--either broken or whole. But I mustn't be slandering him,'
she laughed. 'I remember he's a friend at Casa Copley.'

'Mr. Sybert is my uncle's friend; the rest of us see very little of
him,' Marcia returned as she endeavoured to think of a new theme. Her
companion, however, saved her the trouble.

'And were you not surprised at Mr. Dessart's desertion?'

'Mr. Dessart's desertion?' Marcia repeated the question with a slight
quiver of the eyelids.

'Exchanging Rome for Pittsburg. You Americans do things so suddenly!
One loses one's breath.'

'But his father was ill and they sent for him.'

'Yes; but the surprising part is that he goes for good. The pictures
and carvings and curios are packed; there is a card in the window
saying the studio is for rent--he is giving up art to mine coal
instead.'

Marcia laughed. 'It is a seven-league step from art to coal,' she
acknowledged. 'I had thought myself that he was an artist to the end.'

'Ah--he was an artist because he was young, not because he was called,
and I suppose he got tired of the play. The real artist for you--it is
that poor young man painting moonlight in Venice.' The lady tapped
Marcia's arm gently with her fan. 'But you and I know, Miss Copley,
that Paul Dessart never went back to America just from homesickness;
when a young man hasn't reached thirty yet, you may be pretty sure of
finding a woman behind most of his motives.'

Marcia had the uncomfortable feeling that the lady's eyes were fixed
upon her with a speculative light in their depths. She endeavoured to
look disinterested as she again cast about for a more propitious topic.
Glancing up, she saw that her uncle, accompanied by Laurence Sybert and
Mr. and Mrs. Melville, was crossing the room in their direction.
Sybert, who was laughing and chatting easily with Mrs. Melville,
apparently did not feel that there was any awkwardness in the moment.
He delivered a cordially indifferent bow which was evidently meant to
be divided between Marcia and her companion. After a moment or so of
general greetings, Marcia found herself talking with Mrs. Melville,
while her uncle and the consul-general still discussed riots, and the
lady who wrote appropriated Sybert.

'We are sorry to hear you are leaving the villa so early, though I
suppose we shall all be following in a week or so,' said Mrs. Melville.
'One clings pretty closely to the shady side of the street even now.
Aren't these riots dreadful?' she rambled on. 'Poor Laurence Sybert is
working himself thin over them. It is the only subject one hears
nowadays.'

Marcia achieved an intelligent reply, while at the same time she found
herself listening to the conversation on the other side. To her intense
discomfort, it was still of Paul Dessart.

'Yes, I heard that he had been suddenly called home; that was hard
luck,' said Sybert quietly.

'Between you and me, Paul Dessart never gave up art and went back to
Pittsburg because he was tired of Rome. As I told Miss Copley, when a
young man decides to settle down and be serious, you may mark my words
there's a woman in the case. Oh, I knew it all the time.' She lowered
her tone. 'We'll be reading of an engagement in the Paris _Herald_ one
of these days.'

'I dare say, as usual, you're right,' Sybert said dryly; while Marcia,
inwardly raging and outwardly smiling, gave ear to Mrs. Melville again.

'Oh, did I tell you,' Mrs. Melville asked, 'that we are coming out to
the villa next Saturday for "week-end"? It's a long-standing
invitation, that we've never found a chance to accept. But it's so
charming out there that we can't bear to miss it, and so we are
throwing over all our other engagements in order to get out this week
before you break up.'

Marcia murmured some polite phrases while she tried to catch the gist
of the conversation on the other side. It was not of Paul Dessart, she
reassured herself. The woman who wrote was narrating an adventure with
some 'bread-tickets' of the anti-begging society, and the two
men--Melville and Sybert--were chaffing her uncle. The point of the
story appeared to be against him. He finally broke away, and with a
glance at his watch turned back to his niece.

'Well, Marcia, if we are to catch that six-o'clock train, I think it is
time that we were off.'

Sybert accompanied them to the door, talking riots to her uncle, while
she went on ahead, feeling forgotten and overlooked. Melville joined
them again in the vestibule, and the three fell to discussing
barricades and soldiers until Copley, with another look at his watch,
laughingly declared that they must run.

Sybert for the first time, Marcia thought, gave any sign of being aware
of her presence.

'Well, Miss Marcia,' he said, turning toward her with a friendly smile.
'Your uncle says that you are talking of going back to America next
winter. That is too bad, but we shall hope to see a little of you in
the autumn before you leave. You are going to the Tyrol for the summer,
I hear. That will be pleasant, at least.'

'You talk as if America were a terrible hardship,' said Marcia, taking
her tone from him.

Sybert laughed, with his old shrug. 'Ah, well, it depends on where
one's interests are, I suppose.'

She suddenly flushed again, with the thought that he was referring to
Paul Dessart, and she plunged blindly into another subject to cover her
confusion.

'Did Uncle Howard tell you that we have decided to take Gervasio with
us for the summer? He wanted to find a home for him in Rome; I wanted
to take him with us; Aunt Katherine hadn't made up her mind until
Gerald cried at the thought of parting with him, and, as usual,
Gerald's tears decided the matter.'

'It was a most fortunate whipping for Gervasio the night that we drove
by,' he returned as he held out his hand. 'Well, Miss Marcia, as you
break up next week, I shall probably not see you again. I hope that you
will have a delightful summer.'

Marcia shook hands smilingly, with her heart sunk fathoms deep.

He followed them to the carriage for a last word with her uncle.

'You'd better change your mind, Sybert, and come out to the villa
Saturday night with the Melvilles,' Copley called as the carriage
started.

'I'm sorry, but I'm afraid there's too much excitement elsewhere for me
to afford a vacation just now,' and he bowed a smiling good-bye to
Marcia.




                              CHAPTER XXII


THE next few days were anxious ones for Italy. The straw-weavers of
Tuscany were marching into Florence with the cry, '_Pane o
lavore!_'--'Bread or work!'--and in the north not bread, but revolution
was openly the watchword. Timid tourists who had no desire to be mixed
up in another '49 were scurrying across the frontiers into France and
Switzerland; adventurous gentlemen from the Riviera, eager to enjoy the
fun and not unwilling to take advantage of a universal tumult, were
gaily scrambling in. The ministry, jostled from its usual apathy, had
vigorously set itself to suppressing real and imaginary plots.
Opposition newspapers were sequestered and the editors thrown into
jail; telegrams and letters were withheld, public meetings broken up,
and men arrested in the streets for singing the 'Hymn of Labour.' The
secret police worked night and day. Every cafe and theatre and crowd
had its spies disguised as loungers; and none dared speak the truth to
his neighbour for fear his neighbour was in the pay of the premier.

In Milan the rioters had been lashed into a frenzy by their first taste
of blood, and for three days the future of United Italy looked dark.
Wagons and tramcars were overturned in the streets to make barricades.
Roofs and windows rained down tiles and stones, and the soldiers obeyed
but sullenly when ordered to fire upon the mob. In their hearts many of
them sympathized. The socialists were out in force and working hard,
and their motto was, 'Spread the discontent!' Priests and students from
the universities were stirring up the peasants in the fields and urging
them on to revolt. All dissatisfied classes were for the moment united
in their desire to overthrow the existing government; what should take
its place could be decided later. When Savoy was ousted, then the
others--the republicans, the priests, the socialists, the hungry mob in
the streets--could fight it out among themselves. And as each faction
in its heart believed itself to be the strongest, the fight, if it
should come, was like to prove the end of Italy.

                  *       *       *       *       *

While the rest of the kingdom was filled with tumult, only faint
echoes reached Villa Vivalanti dozing peacefully in the midst of its
hills. Marcia, sitting with folded hands, fretted uselessly at her
forced inaction. She scarcely left the villa grounds; she was
carrying out Sybert's suggestion far more literally than he had meant
it. She had not the moral courage to face the countryside; it seemed
as if every peasant knew about the wheat and followed her with
accusing eyes. Even the villa servants appeared to her awakened
sensibilities to go about their duties perfunctorily, as if they too
shared the general distrust in their employers. The last week dragged
slowly to its end. There were only four more days to be spent in the
villa, and Marcia now was impatient to leave it. She wanted to get up
into the mountains--anywhere out of Italy--where she need never hear
the word 'wheat' again.

Saturday--the week-end that the Melvilles were to spend at the
villa--dawned oppressively hot. It was a foretaste of what Rome could
do in midsummer. Not a leaf was stirring; there was no suggestion of
mist on the hills, and the sun beat down glaringly upon a gaudily
coloured landscape. The outer walls of the villa fairly sizzled in the
light; but inside the atmosphere was respectably tempered. The green
Venetian blinds had been dropped over the windows, the rugs rolled
back, and the floors sprinkled with water. The afternoon sun might do
its worst outside, but the large airy rooms were dark and cool--and
quiet. Half an hour before, the walls had echoed Gerald's despairing
cry, 'I won't go to sleep! I _won't_ go to sleep!' for Gerald was a
true Copley and he took his siestas hardly. But he had eventually
dropped off in the midst of his revolt; and all was quiet now when
Marcia issued from her room, garden hat in hand.

She paused with a light foot at Gerald's door. The little fellow was
spread out, face downward, on the bed, his arms and legs thrown to the
four winds. Marcia smiled upon the little clenched fists and damp
yellow curls and tiptoed downstairs. On a pile of rugs in the lower
hall Gervasio and Marcellus were curled up together, sleeping
peacefully and happily. She smiled a blessing on them also. Next to
Gerald, Gervasio was the dearest little fellow in the world, and
Marcellus the dearest and the homeliest dog.

She raised the blind and stepped on to the loggia. A blast of hot air
struck her, and she hesitated dubiously. It was scarcely the weather
for an afternoon stroll, but the ilex grove looked cool and inviting,
and she finally made a courageous dash across the terrace and plunged
gratefully into its shady fastnesses. The sun-beaten world outside the
little realm of green was an untempered glare of heat and colour. The
only sounds which smote the drowsy air were the drip, drip of the
fountain and the murmurous drone of insects in the borders of the
garden. Marcia paused by the fountain, and dropping down upon the
coping, dipped her fingers idly in the water.

Shaking the drops of water from her fingers, she rose and stood a
moment looking down the green alley she had come by toward the sunny
blaze of terrace at the end. She closed her eyes and pictured it as it
had looked on her birthday night, a fairy scene, with the tiny bulbs of
coloured light glowing among the branches. She pictured Sybert's face
as he had stood beside her. It seemed almost as if the moment would
come back again, if she only thought about it hard enough. And then the
remembrance of that other moment followed, and the expression on
Sybert's face as he had turned away. What did he think? she asked
herself for the hundredth time; and she turned her back upon the
fountain and hurried down the laurel walk as if to shut the memory out.

The wheat field to-day was ablaze with flaming poppies. The reds and
yellows were so crude that no artist would have dared to paint them in
their untoned brilliancy. Marcia paused to study the effect. Her eyes
wandered from this daring foreground across scarcely less brilliant
olive groves and vineyards to Castel Vivalanti on its mountain-top, an
irregular mass of yellow ochre against a sky of cobalt blue. There was
no attempt at shading. The colours were as unaffectedly primary as an
illumination from some old manuscript, or as the outlines a child fills
in from his tin box of half a dozen little cakes of paint. This Italy
was so uncompromising in her moods. No variant note was allowed to
creep in to mar the effect she was striving for. Marcia recalled the
sudden storm of the mountain, how fiercely untamed, how intense it had
been; she thought of the moonlight nights of the spring, when the mood
was lyrical--the soft outline of tower and rain, the songs of
nightingales, the heavy odours of acacia and magnolia blossoms. Italy
was an impressionist, and her children were like her. There were no
half-tones in the Italian nature any more than in the Italian
landscape. There were many varying moods, but each in itself was
concentrated. Just now there were storms, perhaps, but before long
there would be moonlight and singing and love-making again, and the
clouds would be forgotten.

She strolled on to the ruins of the old villa and sat down among the
crumbling arches. She was in a very different mood herself than on that
other afternoon of the early spring when Paul Dessart had found her
there. She thought of the little sketch he had painted, and recalled
her own words as he gave it to her: 'I will keep it to remember you and
the villa by when I go home to America.' The words had been spoken
lightly, but now they sounded prophetic. Everything had seemed before
her then; now all seemed behind. A few months more and she would be
back in America, with possibly nothing more than the sketch to remember
her life in Italy by--and it had meant so much to her; now that it was
slipping away, she realized how much. She seemed to have grown more, to
have felt more, than in all her life before; and she hated
inexpressibly to leave it behind.

Crossing to the little grotto that had formed the subject of the
picture, she stood gazing pensively at the dilapidated moss-grown pile
of stones. The afternoon when Paul had sketched it seemed years before;
in reality it was not two months. She thought of him as he had looked
that day--so enthusiastic and young and debonair--and she thought of
him without a tremor. Many things had changed since then, and she had
changed with them. If only Eleanor's suspicion might be true, that he
would come to care for Margaret! She clung to the suggestion. Eleanor's
'superstition' need trouble her no more; Paul would not need to be
avenged.

She turned aside, and as she did so something caught her eyes. She
leaned over to look, and then started back with an exclamation of
alarm. A man was lying asleep, almost at her feet, hidden by the tall
weeds that choked the entrance to the grotto. The first involuntary
thought that flashed to her mind was of Gervasio's stepfather, but
immediately she knew that he was not the sleeper. Gervasio's stepfather
was old, with a grizzled beard; it was evident that this man was young,
in spite of the fact that his hat was pulled across his eyes. She
laughed at her own fear; it was some peasant who had come from the
fields to rest in the shade.

She leaned over to look again, and as she did so her heart suddenly
leaped into her mouth. The man's shirt was open at the throat, and
there was a dark-purple crucifix tattooed upside down upon his breast.
For a second she stood staring, powerless to move; the next, she was
running wildly across the blazing wheat field toward the shelter of the
villa, with a frightened glance behind at the shadow of the cypresses.




                             CHAPTER XXIII


MARCIA passed the afternoon in a state of nervous impatience for her
uncle's return. She said nothing to Mrs. Copley of the man she had
found asleep in the grotto, and the effort to preserve an outward
serenity added no little to her inner trepidation. In vain she tried to
reason with her fear; it was not a subject which responded to logic.
She assured herself over and over again that the man could not be the
same Neapolitan who had warned her uncle; that he was safely in prison;
and that the tattooed crucifix was only the general mark of a secret
society. The assurance did not carry conviction. Her first startled
impression had been too deep to be thrown off lightly, and coming just
then, in the midst of the rioting and lawlessness, the incident carried
additional force. She had lately heard many stories of lonely villas
being broken into, of travellers on the Campagna being waylaid and
robbed, of the vindictiveness of the Camorra, which her uncle had
opposed. The stories were not reassuring; and though she resolutely put
them out of her mind, she found herself thinking of them again and
again. Italy's elaborate police system, she knew, was not merely for
show.

Mr. Copley and the Melvilles were due at five, but as they had not
appeared by half-past, Mrs. Copley decided that they had missed their
train, and she and Marcia sat down to tea--or, more accurately, to iced
lemonade--without waiting. The table was set under the shade of the
ilex trees where the grove met the upper end of the terrace, and where
any slight breeze that chanced to be stirring would find them out.
Gerald and Gervasio swallowed their allotted glassful and two
_brioches_ with dispatch, and withdrew to the cool shadows of the ilex
grove to play at horse with poor, patient Bianca and the streaming
ribbons of her cap. Mrs. Copley and Marcia took the repast in more
leisurely fashion, with snatches of very intermittent conversation.
Marcia's eyes wandered in the pauses to the poppy-sprinkled wheat field
and the cypresses beyond.

'I believe they are coming, after all!' Mrs. Copley finally exclaimed,
as she shaded her eyes with her hands and looked down across the open
stretch of vineyards to where the Roman road, a yellow ribbon of dust,
divided the fields. 'Yes, that is the carriage!'

Marcia looked at the moving speck and shook her head. 'Your eyes are
better than mine, Aunt Katherine, if you can recognize Uncle Howard at
this distance.'

'The carriage is turning up our road. I am sure it is they. Poor
things! I am afraid they will be nearly dead after the drive in this
heat. Rome must have been unbearable to-day.' And she hastily
dispatched Pietro to prepare more iced drinks.

Ten minutes later, however, the carriage had resolved itself into a
jangling Campagna wine-cart, and the two resigned themselves to waiting
again. By half-past seven Marcia was growing frankly nervous. Could
anything have happened to her uncle? Should she have told her aunt and
sent some one to meet him with a warning message? Surely no one would
dare to stop the carriage on the open road in broad daylight. A hundred
wild imaginings were chasing through her brain, when finally, close
upon eight, the rumble of wheels sounded on the avenue.

Both Mrs. Copley and Marcia uttered an exclamation of relief. Mrs.
Copley had been worried on the score of the dinner, and Marcia for any
number of reasons which disappeared with the knowledge that her uncle
was safe. They hurried out to the loggia to meet the new-comers, and as
the carriage drew up, not only did the Melvilles and Mr. Copley
descend, but Laurence Sybert as well. At sight of him Marcia hung back,
asking herself, with a quickly beating heart, why he had come.

Mrs. Copley, with the first glance at their faces, interrupted her own
graceful words of welcome to cry: 'Has anything happened? Why are you
so late?'

They were visibly excited, and did not wait for greetings before
pouring out their news--an attempted assassination of King Humbert on
the Pincian hill that afternoon--Rome under martial law--a plot
discovered to assassinate the premier and other leaders in control.

The two asked questions which no one answered, and all talked at
once--all but Sybert. Marcia noticed that he was unusually silent, and
it struck her that his face had a haggard look. He did not so much as
glance in her direction, except for a bare nod of greeting on his
arrival.

'Well, well,' Copley broke into the general babel, 'it's a terrible
business. You should see the excitement in Rome! The city is simply
demoralized; but we'll give you the particulars later. Let us get into
something cool first--we're all nearly dead. Has it been hot out here?
Rome has been a foretaste of the inferno.'

'And this young man,' Melville added, laying a hand on Sybert's arm,
'just got back from the Milan riots. Hadn't slept, any to speak of for
four days, and what does he do this afternoon but sit down at his desk,
determined to make up his back work, Sunday or no Sunday, with the
thermometer where it pleases. Your husband and I had to drag him off by
main force.'

'Poor Mr. Sybert! you do look worn out. Not slept for four days? Why,
you must be nearly dead! You may go to bed immediately after dinner,
and I shall not have you called till Monday morning.'

'I've been sleeping for the last twenty-four hours, Mrs. Copley, and I
really don't need any more sleep at present,' he protested laughingly,
but with a slight air of embarrassment. It was a peculiar trait of
Sybert's that he never liked to be made the subject of conversation,
which was possibly the reason why he had been made the subject of so
many conversations. This reticence when speaking of himself or his own
feelings, struck the beholder as somewhat puzzling. It had always
puzzled Marcia, and had been one reason why she had been so persistent
in her desire to find out what he was really like.

The party shortly assembled for dinner, the women in the coolest of
light summer gowns, the men in white linen instead of evening dress.
They went into the dining-room without affording Marcia a chance to
catch her uncle alone. The meal did not pass off very gaily.
Assassinations were served with the soup, bread riots with the fish,
and hypothetical robberies and plots with the further courses; while
Pietro presided with a sinister obsequiousness which added darkly to
the effect. In vain Mrs. Copley tried to turn the conversation into
pleasanter channels. The men were too stirred up to talk of anything
else, and the threatened tragedy of the day was rehearsed in all its
bearings.

The assassin had dashed out from the crowd that lined the driveway and
sprung to the side of the royal carriage before any of the bystanders
had realized what was happening. The white-haired aide-de-camp sitting
at his Majesty's side was the first to see, and springing to his feet,
he struck the man fiercely in the face just as he raised his arm. Had
it not been for the aide-de-camp's quick action, the man would have
plunged his stiletto into the King's heart.

Mrs. Copley and Mrs. Melville shuddered, and Marcia leaned forward
listening with wide eyes.

'Right on the Pincio, mind you.' Melville in his excitement thumped the
table until the glasses rang. 'Not a chance of the fellow's getting
off. Scarcely a chance of his accomplishing his purpose. He knew he
would be taken. Shouted, "_Viva liberta!_" as the soldiers grabbed
him--I swear it beats me what these fellows are after. "_Viva
liberta!_" That's what they cried when they put the House of Savoy on
the throne, and now they're trying to pull it off again with the same
cry.'

'I fear the seeds of revolution are sown pretty thick in Italy,' said
Copley.

'Where aren't there the seeds of revolution to-day?' Melville groaned.
'Central Africa is only waiting a government in order to overturn it.'

'By the way,' interpolated Copley, 'the assassin is a friend of
Sybert's.'

'A friend of Sybert's!' Marcia echoed the words before she considered
their form.

Sybert caught the expression and smiled slightly.

'Not a very dear friend, Miss Marcia. I first made his acquaintance, I
believe, on the day that you discovered Marcellus.'

'How did that happen?' Mrs. Copley asked.

'I heard him talking in a cafe.'

'It's a pity you didn't hand him over,' said Melville. 'You would have
saved the police considerable trouble. It seems they have been watching
him for some time.'

'I wasn't handing people over just then,' Sybert returned dryly.
'However, I don't see that the police need complain. It strikes me that
he has handed himself over in about as effectual a way as he possibly
could; he won't go about any more sticking stilettos into kings. The
Italians are an excitable lot when they once get aroused; they talk
more than is wise--but when it comes to doing they usually back down.
It seems, however, that this fellow had the courage of his convictions.
After all, it was, in a way, rather fine of him, you know.'

'A pretty poor way,' Melville frowned.

'Oh, certainly,' Sybert acquiesced carelessly. 'Umberto's a gentleman.
I don't care to see him knifed.'

'What I can't understand,' reiterated Melville, 'is the fellow's point
of view. No matter how much he may object to kings, he must know that
he can never rid the country of them through assassination; as soon as
one king is out of the way, another stands in line to take his place.
No possible good could come to the man through Humbert's death, and he
must have known that he had not one chance in a hundred of escaping
himself--I confess his motive is beyond me. The only thing that
explains it to my mind is that the fellow's crazy, but the police seem
to think he's entirely sane.'

Sybert leaned back in his chair and studied the flowers in the centre
of the table with a speculative frown.

'No,' he said slowly, 'the man was not crazy. I understand his motive,
though I don't know that I can make it clear. It was probably in part
mistaken patriotism--but not entirely that. I heard him state it very
clearly, and it struck me at the time that it was doubtless, at bottom,
the motive for most assassinations. His words, as I remember them, were
something like this: "Who is the King? He is only a man. Why is he so
different from me? Am I not a man, too? I am, and before I die the King
shall know it."'

Sybert raised his eyes and glanced about the table. Copley nodded and
Melville frowned thoughtfully. The two elder ladies were listening with
polite attention, and Marcia was leaning forward with her eyes on his
face. Sybert immediately dropped his own eyes to the flowers again.

'There you have the matter in a nutshell. Why did he wish to
assassinate the King? As an expression of his own identity. Through a
perfectly natural egotistical impulse for self-assertion. The man had
been oppressed and trampled on all his life. He was conscious of powers
that were undeveloped, of force that he could not use. He was raging
blindly against the weight that was crushing him down. The weight was
society, but its outward symbol was the King. The King had only one
life to lose, and this despised, obscure Neapolitan peasant, the very
lowest of the King's subjects, had it in his power to take that life
away. It was the man's one chance of utterance--his one chance of
becoming an individual, of leaving his mark on the age. And, in acting
as he did, he acted not for himself alone, but for the people; for the
inarticulate thousands who are struggling for some mode of expression,
but are bound by cowardice and ignorance and inertia.'

Sybert paused and raised his eyes to Melville's with a sort of
challenge.

'If that man had been able to obtain congenial work--work in which he
could take an interest, could express his own identity; if he could
have become a little prosperous, so that he need not fear for his
family's support; why, then--the King's life would not have been in
danger to-day. And as long as there is any man left in this kingdom of
Italy,' he added, 'who, in spite of honest endeavour, cannot earn
enough to support his family, just so long is the King's life in
danger.'

'And there are thousands of such men,' put in Copley.

Melville uttered a short laugh. 'By heavens, it's true!' he said. 'The
position of American consul may not carry much glory, but I don't know
that I care to trade it with Umberto for his kingdom.'

'Do you suppose the King was scared?' inquired Marcia. 'I wonder what
it feels like to wake up every morning and think that maybe before
night you'll be assassinated.'

'He didn't appear to be scared,' said her uncle. 'He shrugged his
shoulders when they caught the man, and remarked that this was one of
the perquisites of his trade.'

'Really?' she asked. 'Good for Umberto!'

'Oh, he's no coward,' said Sybert. 'He knows the price of crowns these
days.'

'It's terrible!' Mrs. Melville breathed. 'I am thankful they caught the
assassin at least. Society ought to sleep better to-night for having
him removed.'

'Ah,' said Sybert, 'Society can't be protected that way. The point is
that he leaves others behind to do his work.'

'The man was from Naples, you say?' Mrs. Copley asked suddenly.

Her husband read her thoughts and smiled reassuringly. 'So far as I
have heard, my dear, there was no crucifix tattooed upon his breast.'

Marcia raised her head quickly. 'Uncle Howard,' she asked, 'is that the
mark of a society or of just that special man?'

'I can't say, I'm sure, Marcia,' he returned with a laugh. 'I suspect
that it's an original piece of blasphemy on his part, though it may
belong to a cult.'

'When is his time up?' she persisted. 'To get out of prison, I mean.'

'I don't know; I really haven't figured it up. There are enough things
to worry about without troubling over him.'

In her excitement over the King's attempted assassination she had
almost forgotten the man of the grotto, but her uncle's careless laugh
brought back her terror. The man might at that very moment be watching
them from the ilex grove. She cast a quick glance over her shoulder
toward the open glass doors which led to the balcony. It was moonlight
again. In contrast to the soft radiance of the marble-paved terrace,
the ilex shadows were black with the sinister blackness of a pall. She
looked down at her plate with a little shiver, and she sat through the
rest of the meal in an agony of impatience to get up and move about.

Once she roused herself to listen to the conversation. They were
talking of the soldiers; a large detachment of carabinieri had been
stationed at Palestrina, and the mountain roads were being patrolled.
The carriage that night had passed two men on horseback stationed at
the turning where the road to Castel Vivalanti branches off from the
Via Praenestina. Mrs. Copley said something about its giving them a
feeling of security at the villa to have so many soldiers near, and
Melville replied that whatever the crimes of the Italian government, it
at least looked after the safety of its guests, Marcia listened with a
sigh of relief, and she rose from the table with an almost easy mind.
They all adjourned to the salon for coffee, and as soon as she could
speak to her uncle without attracting attention she touched him on the
arm.

'Come out on the loggia just a moment, Uncle Howard; I want to tell you
something.'

He followed her in some surprise. She went down the steps and paused on
the terrace, well out of ear-shot of the salon windows.

'Uncle Howard, I saw the tattooed man to-day.'

Mr. Copley paused with a match in one hand and a cigar in the other.
'Whereabouts?' he asked.

'Asleep in the ruined grotto.'

'Are you sure?'

'There was a crucifix tattooed upside down on his breast.'

'So!'

He examined the pavement in silence a moment, then he raised his head
with an excited little laugh such as a hunter might give when hot on
the scent.

'Well! I thought I had done for him, but it appears not.' He strode
over to the salon windows. 'Sybert--ah, Sybert,' he called in a low
tone, 'just step out here a moment.'

Sybert joined them with a questioning look. Copley very deliberately
scratched his match on the balustrade and lighted his cigar. 'Tell your
story, Marcia,' he said between puffs.

She felt a load of anxiety roll from her shoulders; if he could take
the information as casually as this, it could not be very serious. She
repeated the account of what she had seen, and the two men exchanged a
silent glance. Copley gave another short laugh.

'It appears that his Majesty and I are in the same boat.'

'I warned you that if you let that wheat be sold in your name you could
expect the honour,' Sybert growled.

'What do you mean?' Marcia asked quickly.

'Just at present, Miss Marcia, I'm afraid that neither your uncle nor
myself is as popular as our virtues demand.'

'Oh, there's no danger,' said Copley. 'They wouldn't dare break into
the house, and of course I sha'n't be fool enough to walk the
country-side unarmed. The first thing in the morning, I shall send into
Palestrina for some carabinieri to patrol the place. And on Monday the
family can move into Rome instead of waiting till Wednesday. There's
nothing to be afraid of,' he added, with a reassuring glance at Marcia.
'Forewarned is forearmed--we'll see that the house is locked to-night.'

'Can you trust the servants?' Sybert asked.

Copley looked up quickly as a thought struck him.

'By Jove! I don't know that I can. Come to think of it, I shouldn't
trust that Pietro as far as I could see him. He's been acting mighty
queer lately.'

Marcia's eyes suddenly widened in terror, and she recalled one
afternoon when she had caught Pietro in the village talking to
Gervasio's stepfather, as well as a dozen other little things that she
had not thought of at the time, but which now seemed to have a secret
meaning.

Sybert saw her look of fear and he said lightly: 'There's not the
slightest danger, Miss Marcia. We'll get the soldiers here in the
morning; and for to-night, even if we can't put much trust in the
butler, there are at least three men in the house who are above
suspicion and who are armed.' He touched his pocket with a laugh. 'When
it comes to the point I am a very fair shot, and so is your uncle. You
were wishing a little while ago that something exciting would
happen--if it gives you any pleasure, you can pretend that this is an
adventure.'

'Oh, yes, Marcia,' her uncle rejoined. 'Don't let the thought of the
tattooed man disturb your sleep. He's more spectacular than dangerous.'

The others had come out on to the loggia and were exclaiming at the
beauty of the night.

'Howard,' Mrs. Copley called, 'don't you want to come and make a fourth
at whist?'

'In a moment,' he returned. 'We won't say anything to the others,' he
said in a low tone to Marcia and Sybert.

'There's no use raising any unnecessary excitement.'

'Marcia, if you and Mr. Sybert would like to play, we can make it
six-handed euchre instead of whist.'

Sybert glanced down to see that her hand was trembling, and he decided
that to make her sit through a game of cards would be too great a test
of her nerves.

'Thank you, Mrs. Copley,' he called back; 'it's too fine a night to
pass indoors. Miss Marcia and I will stay out here.'

The proposal was a test of his own nerves, but he had schooled himself
for a good many years to hide his feelings; it was an ordeal he was
used to.

With final exclamations on the beauty of the night, the whist party
returned to the salon. Sybert brought a wicker chair from the loggia
for Marcia, and seated himself on the parapet while he lighted a cigar
with a nonchalance she could not help but admire. Did she but know it,
his nonchalance was only surface deep, though the cause for his inward
tumult had nothing to do with the man of the ruined grotto. They sat in
silence for a time, looking down on the shimmering Campagna. The scene
was as beautiful as on that other night of the early spring, but now it
was full summer. It was so peaceful, so idyllic, so thoroughly the
Italy of poetry and romance, that it seemed absurd to think of plots
and riots in connexion with that landscape. At least Marcia was not
thinking of them now; she was willing to take her uncle at his word and
leave the responsibility to him. The thing that was still burning in
her mind was that unexplained moment by the fountain. It was the first
time she had been alone with Sybert since. How would he act? Would he
simply ignore it, as if it had never happened? He would, of course; and
that would be far worse than if he apologized or congratulated her, for
then she would have a chance to explain. What did he think? she asked
herself for the hundredth time as she covertly scanned his dark,
impassive face. Did he think her engaged to Paul Dessart, or did he
divine the real reason why the young man had so suddenly sailed for
America? Even so, it would not put her in a much better light in his
eyes. He would think she had been playing with Paul and--her face
flushed at the thought--had tried to play with him.

Sybert was the one who broke the silence. 'I think,' he said slowly,
'that I could spot your man with the crucifix this very moment.' He
pointed with his cigar toward the hill above them, where little
stone-walled Castel Vivalanti was outlined against the sky. 'If I am
not mistaken, he is in the back room of a _trattoria_ up there, in
company with our friend Tarquinio of the Bed-quilt, who,' he added
meditatively, 'is a fool. Those carabinieri are not guarding the roads
for nothing. A number of Neapolitans have come north lately who might
better have stayed at home--Camorrists for the most part--and the
government is after them. This fellow with the crucifix is without
doubt one of them, and in all probability he just happened into the
ruins this afternoon to rest, without having an idea who lived here. At
any rate, I strongly suspect that your uncle it not the hare he's
hunting. Italy is too busy just at present to take time for private
revenge--though,' he smiled, 'I have no wish to spoil your adventure.'

Marcia breathed a little sigh by way of answer, and another silence
fell between them.

'On such a night as this,' he said dreamily, 'did you and I, Miss
Marcia, once take a drive together.'

'And we didn't speak a word!'

'I don't know that we did,' he laughed. 'At least I don't recall the
conversation.'

From the valley below them there came the sound of a man's voice
singing a familiar serenade. Only the tune was audible, but the words
they knew:

               'Open your casement, love.
                I come as a robber to steal your heart.'

Sybert, listening, watched her from under drooping lids. He was
struggling with a sudden temptation which almost overmastered him. He
thought her engaged to another man, but--why not come as a robber and
steal her heart? In the past few weeks he had seen lifelong hopes come
to nothing; he was wounded and discouraged and in need of human
sympathy, and he had fought his battles alone. During that time of
struggle Marcia had come to occupy a large part of his consciousness.
He had seen in her character undeveloped possibilities--a promise for
the future--and the desire had subtly taken hold of him to be the one
to watch and direct her growth. The new feeling was the more intense,
in that it had taken the place of hopes and interests that were dying.
And then that, too, had been snatched away. Since the night of her
birthday ball he had not doubted for a moment that she was engaged to
Paul Dessart. It had never occurred to him that the scene he had
interrupted was merely her sympathetic fashion of dismissing the young
man. A dozen little things had come back to him that before had had no
significance, and he had accepted the fact without questioning. It
seemed of a piece with the rest of his fate that this should be added
just when it was hardest for him to bear. It was the final touch of
Nemesis that made her work rounded and complete.

And now, as he watched her, he was filled with a sudden fierce
rebellion, an impulse to fight against the fate that was robbing him,
to snatch her away from Paul Dessart. Every instinct of his nature
urged him forward; only honour held him back. He turned away and with
troubled eyes studied the distance. She had chosen freely--whether
wisely or not, the future would prove. He knew that he could not
honourably stretch out so much as his little finger to call her back.

Presently he pulled himself together and began to talk fluently and
easily on purely impersonal themes--of the superiority of the Tyrol
over the Swiss lakes as a summer resort, of the character of the people
in Sicily, of books and art and European politics, and of a dozen
different subjects that Marcia had never heard him mention before. It
was the small talk of the diplomat, of the man who must always be ready
to meet every one on his own ground. Marcia had known that Sybert could
talk on other subjects than Italian politics when he chose, for she had
overheard him at dinners and receptions, but he had never chosen when
with her. In their early intercourse he had scarcely taken the trouble
to talk to her in any but the most perfunctory way, and then suddenly
their relations had no longer demanded formal conversation. They had
somehow jumped over the preliminary period of getting acquainted and
had reached the stage where they could understand each other without
talking. And here he was conversing with her as politely and
impersonally as if they had known each other only half an hour. She
kept up her end of the conversation with monosyllables. She felt
chilled and hurt; he might at least be frank. Whatever he thought of
her, there was no need for this elaborate dissimulation. She had no
need to ask herself to-night if he were watching her. His eyes never
for a moment left the moonlit campagna.

After half an hour or so Mrs. Copley stepped to the window of the salon
to ask Marcia if she did not wish a wrap. It was warm, of course, but
the evening dews were heavy. Marcia scoffed at the absurdity of a wrap
on such an evening, but she rose obediently. They strolled into the
house and paused at the door of the salon. The whist-players were
studying their cards again with anxious brows; it appeared to be a
scientific game.

Marcia shook her head and laughed. 'On such a night as this to be
playing whist!'

Melville glanced up at her with a little smile. 'Ah, well, Miss Marcia,
we're growing old--moonlight and romance were made for the young.'

Sybert smiled rather coldly as he turned away. It struck him that the
remark was singularly malapropos.

Marcia went on up to her room, and throwing about her shoulders a
chiffon scarf, an absurd apology for a wrap, she paused a moment by the
open glass doors of the balcony and stood looking down upon the moonlit
landscape. She felt sore and bruised and hopeless. Sybert was beyond
her; she did not understand him. He had evidently made up his mind, and
nothing would move him; he would give her no chance to put herself
right. She suddenly threw back her head and stiffened her shoulders. If
that were the line he chose to take--very well! She would meet him on
his own ground. She turned back, and on her way downstairs paused a
second at Gerald's door. It was a family habit to look in on him at all
hours of the night to make sure that he was sleeping and duly covered
up, though to-night it could scarcely be claimed that cover was
necessary. She glanced in, and then, with a quickening of her breath,
took a step farther to make sure. The bed was empty. She stood staring
a moment, not knowing what to think, and the next she was hurrying down
the hall toward the servants' quarters. She knocked on Bianca's door,
and finding no one within, called up Granton.

There was no cause for worry, Granton assured her. Master Gerald and
that little Italian brat were probably in the scullery, stealing
raisins and chocolate.

'Oh,' said Marcia, with a sigh of relief; 'but where's Bianca? She
ought to sit by Gerald till he goes to sleep.

Bianca!--Granton sniffed disdainfully--no one could make head or tail
of Bianca. Her opinion was that the girl was half crazy. She had been
in there that night crying, and telling her how much she liked the
signora and the signorina, and how she hated to leave them.

'But she isn't going to leave,' said Marcia. 'We've decided to take her
with us.'

Granton responded with a disdainful English shrug and the reiterated
opinion that the girl was crazy. Marcia did not stop to argue the
point, but set out for the kitchen by way of the 'middle staircase,'
creeping along quietly, determined to catch the marauders unawares. Her
caution was superfluous. The rear of the house was entirely deserted.
No sign of a boy, no sign of a servant anywhere about. The doors were
open and the rooms were vacant. She hurried upstairs again in growing
mystification, and turned toward Gervasio's room. The little fellow was
in bed and sound asleep. What did it mean? she asked herself. What
could have become of Gerald, and where had all the servants gone?

Suddenly a horrible suspicion flashed over her. Gervasio's
stepfather--could he have stolen Gerald by way of revenge? That was why
Bianca was crying! It was a plot. She had overheard, and they had
threatened to kill her if she told. Perhaps they would hold him for a
ransom. Perhaps--as the sound of her uncle's careless laugh floated up
from below she caught her breath in a convulsive sob and stretched out
her hand against the wall to steady herself.




                              CHAPTER XXIV


COLLECTING herself sufficiently to know that she must not cry out or
alarm her aunt, Marcia hurried to the front staircase and stood a
moment on the landing, hesitating what to do. Sybert was lounging in
the doorway leading on to the loggia. She leaned over the balustrade
and called to him softly so as not to attract the attention of the
others. He turned with a start at the sound of his name, and in
response to her summons crossed the hall in his usual leisurely stroll.
But at the foot of the stairs, as he caught sight of her face in the
dim candle-light, he came springing up three steps at a time.

'What's the matter? What's happened?' he cried.

'Gerald!' Marcia breathed in a sobbing whisper.

'Gerald!' he repeated, anxious lines showing in his face. 'Good
heavens, Marcia! What's happened?'

'I don't know; he's gone,' she said wildly. 'Come up here, where Aunt
Katherine won't hear us.' She led the way up into the hall again and
explained in broken sentences.

Sybert turned without a word and strode back to Gerald's room. He stood
upon the threshold, looking at the empty little crib and tossed pillows.

'It will simply kill Uncle Howard and Aunt Katherina if anything has
happened to him,' Marcia faltered.

'Nothing has happened to him,' Sybert returned shortly. 'The scoundrels
wouldn't dare steal a child. Every police spy in Italy would be after
them. He must be with Bianca somewhere.'

He turned away from the room and went on down the stone passage toward
the rear of the house. He paused at the head of the middle staircase,
thinking the matter over with frowning brows, while Marcia anxiously
studied his face. As they stood there in the dim moonlight that
streamed in through the small square window over the stairs they
suddenly heard the patter of bare feet in the passage below, and in
another moment Gerald himself came scurrying up the winding stone
stairway, looking like a little white rat in the dimness.

Marcia uttered a cry of joy, and Sybert squared his shoulders as if a
weight had dropped from them. Their second glance at the child's face,
however, told them that something had happened. His little white
nightgown was draggled with dew, his face was twitching nervously, and
his eyes were wild with terror. He reached the top step and plunged
into Marcia's arms with a burst of sobbing.

'Gerald, Gerald, what's the matter? Don't make such a noise. Hush,
dear; you will frighten mamma. Marcia won't let anything hurt you. Tell
me what's the matter.'

Gerald clung to her, crying and trembling and pouring out a torrent of
unintelligible Italian. Sybert bent down, and taking him in his arms,
carried him back to his own room. 'No one's going to hurt you. Stop
crying and tell us what's the matter,' he said peremptorily.

Gerald caught his breath and told his story in a mixture of English and
Italian and sobs. It had been so hot, and the nightingales had made
such a noise, that he couldn't go to sleep; and he had got up very
softly so as not to disturb mamma, and had crept out the back way just
to get some cherries. (A group of scrub trees, cherry, almond, and
pomegranate, grew close to the villa walls in the rear.) While he was
sitting under the tree eating cherries, some men came up and stopped in
the bushes close by, and he could hear what they said, and one of them
was Pietro. Here he began to cry again, and the soothing had to be done
over.

'Well, what did they say? Tell us what they said, Gerald,' Sybert broke
in, in his low, insistent tones.

'Vey said my papa was a bad man, an' vey was going to kill him 'cause
he had veir money in his pocket--an' I don't want my papa killed!' he
wailed.

Marcia's eyes met Sybert's in silence, and he emitted a low breath that
was half a whistle.

'What else did they say, Gerald? You needn't be afraid. We won't let
them hurt your papa, but you must remember everything they said, so
that we can catch them.'

'Pietro said he was going to kill you, too, 'cause you was here an' was
bad like papa,' Gerald sobbed.

'Go on,' Sybert urged. 'What else did they say?'

'Vey didn't say nuffin more, but went away in ve grove. An' I was
scared an' kept still, an' it was all _nero_ under ve trees; an' ven I
cwept in _pianissimo_ an' I found you--an' I don't want you killed, an'
I don't want papa killed.'

'Don't be afraid. We won't let them hurt us. And now try to remember
how many men there were.'

'Pietro an'--some uvers, an' vey went away in ve trees.'

They questioned him some more, but got merely a variation of the same
story; it was evidently all he knew. Marcia called Granton to sit with
him and tremulously explained the situation. Granton received the
information calmly; it was all she had ever expected in Italy, she said.

Out in the hall again, Marcia looked at Sybert questioningly; she was
quite composed. Gerald was safe at least, and they knew what was
coming. She felt that her uncle and Sybert would bring things right.

'What shall we do?' she asked.

Sybert, with folded arms, was considering the question.

'It's evidently a mixture of robbery and revenge and mistaken
patriotism all rolled into one. It would be convenient if we knew how
many there were; Pietro and Gervasio's stepfather and your man with the
crucifix we may safely count upon, but just how many more we have no
means of knowing. However, there's no danger of their beginning
operations till they think we're asleep.' He looked at his watch. 'It
is a quarter to ten. We have a good two hours still, and we'll prepare
to surprise them. We won't tell the people downstairs just yet, for it
won't do any good, and their talk and laughter are the best protection
we could have. You don't know where your uncle keeps his revolver, do
you?'

'Yes; in the top drawer of his writing-table.' She stepped into Mr.
Copley's room and pulled open the drawer. 'Why, it's gone!'

'I say, the plot thickens!' and Sybert, too, uttered a short, low
laugh, as Copley had done on the terrace.

'And the rifle's gone,' Marcia added, her glance wandering to the
corner where the gun-case usually stood.

'It's evident that our friend Pietro has been helping himself; but if
he thinks he's going to shoot us with our own arms he's mistaken. We
must get word to the soldiers at Palestrina--did you tell me the
servants were gone?'

'I couldn't find any one but Granton. The whole house is empty.'

'It's the Camorra!' he exclaimed softly.

'The Camorra?' Marcia paled a trifle at the name.

'Ah--it's plain enough. We should have suspected it before. Pietro is a
member and has been acting as a spy from the inside. It appears to be a
very prettily worked out plot. They have waited until they think
there's money in the house; your uncle has just sold a big consignment
of wheat. They have probably dismissed the servants with their usual
formula: "Be silent, and you live; speak, and you die." The servants
would be more afraid of the Camorra than of the police.--How about the
stablemen?'

'Oh, I can't believe they'd join a plot against us,' Marcia cried.
'Angelo and Giovanni I would trust anywhere.'

'In that case they've been silenced; they are where they won't give
testimony until it is too late. I dare say the fellows are even
planning to ride off on the horses themselves. By morning they would be
well into the mountains of the Abruzzi, where the Camorrists are at
home. We'll have to get help from Palestrina. If we could reach those
guards at the cross-roads, they would ride in with the message. It's
only two miles away, but----' He frowned a trifle. 'I suppose the house
is closely watched, and it will be difficult to get out unseen. We'll
have to try it, though.'

'Whom can we send?'

He was silent a moment. 'I don't like to leave you,' he said slowly,
'but I'm afraid I'll have to go.'

'Oh!' said Marcia, with a little gasp. She stood looking down at the
floor with troubled eyes, and Sybert watched her, careless that the
time was passing.

Marcia suddenly raised her eyes, with an exclamation of relief.
'Gervasio!' she cried. 'We can send Gervasio.'

'Could we trust him?' he doubted.

'Anywhere! And he can get away without being seen easier than you
could. I am sure he can do it; he is very intelligent.'

'I'd forgotten him. Yes, I believe that is the best way. You go and
wake him, and I'll write a note to the soldiers.' Sybert turned to the
writing-table as he spoke, and Marcia hurried back to Gervasio's room.

The boy was asleep, with the moonlight streaming across his pillow. She
bent over him hesitatingly, while her heart reproached her at having to
wake him and send him out on such an errand. But the next moment she
had reflected that it might be the only chance for him as well as for
the rest of them, and she laid her hand gently on his forehead.

'Gervasio,' she whispered. 'Wake up, Gervasio. Sh--_silenzio!_ Dress
just as fast as you can. No, you haven't done anything; don't be
frightened. Signor Siberti is going to tell you a secret--_un
segreto_,' she repeated impressively. 'Put on these clothes,' she
added, hunting out a dark suit from his wardrobe. 'And never mind your
shoes and stockings. Dress _subito, subito_, and then come on
tiptoe--_pianissimo_--to Signor Copley's room.'

Gervasio was into his clothes and after her almost before she had got
back. When undirected by Bianca, his dressing was a simple matter.

Sybert drew him across the threshold and closed the door. 'What shall
we tell him?' he questioned Marcia.

'Tell him the truth. He can understand, and we can trust him.' And
dropping on her knees beside the boy, she laid her hands on his
shoulders. 'Gervasio,' she said in her slow Italian, 'some bad, naughty
men are coming here to-night to try to kill us and steal our things.
Pietro is one of them' (Pietro had that very afternoon boxed Gervasio's
ears for stealing sugar from the tea-table), 'and your stepfather is
one, and he will take you back to Castel Vivalanti, and you will never
see us again.'

Gervasio listened, with his eyes on her face and his lips parted in
horror. Sybert here broke in and explained about the soldiers, and how
he was to reach the guard at the corners, and he ended by hiding the
note in the front of his blouse. 'Do you understand?' he asked, 'do you
think you can do it?'

Gervasio nodded, his eyes now shining with excitement. 'I'll bring the
soldiers,' he whispered, '_sicure_, signore, _sicurissimo_! And if they
catch me,' he added, 'I'll say the _padrone_ has whipped me and I'm
running away.'

'You'll do,' Sybert said with a half-laugh, and taking the boy by the
hand, he led the way back to the middle staircase, and the three crept
down with as little noise as possible.

They traversed on tiptoe the long brick passageway that led to the
kitchen, and paused upon the threshold. The great stone-walled room was
empty and quiet and echoing as on the first day they had come to the
villa. The doors and windows were swinging wide and the moonlight was
streaming in.

Sybert shook his head in a puzzled frown. 'What I can't make out,' he
said in a low tone, 'is why they should leave everything so open. They
must have known that we would find out before we went to bed that the
servants were missing. Who usually locks up?'

'Pietro.'

'You and I will lock up to-night.' He considered a moment. 'We mustn't
let him out within sight of the grove. A window on the eastern side of
the house would be best, where the shrubbery grows close to the walls.'

Marcia led the way into a little store-room opening from the kitchen,
and Sybert gave Gervasio his last directions.

'Keep well in the shadow of the trees across the driveway and down
around the lower terrace. Creep on your hands and knees through the
wheat field, and then strike straight for the cross-roads and run every
step of the way. _Capisci?_'

Gervasio nodded, and Marcia bent and kissed him and whispered in his
ear, 'If you bring the soldiers, Gervasio, you may live with us always
and be our little boy, just like Gerald.'

He nodded again, fairly trembling with anxiety to get started. Sybert
carefully swung the window open, and the little fellow dropped to the
ground and crept like a cat into the shadows. They stood by the open
window for several minutes, straining their ears to listen, but no
sound came back except the peaceful music of a summer night--the murmur
of insects and the songs of nightingales. Gervasio had got off safely.

'Now we'll lock the house,' Sybert added in an undertone, 'so that when
our friends come to call they will have to come the front way.'

He closed the window softly and examined with approval the inside
shutters. They were made of solid wood with heavy iron bolts and
hinges. The villa had been planned in the old days before the police
force was as efficient as now, and it was quite prepared to stand a
siege.

'It will take considerable strength to open these, and some noise,' he
remarked as he swung the shutters to and shot the bolts.

They groped their way out and went from room to room, closing and
bolting the windows and doors with as little noise as possible. Sybert
appeared, to Marcia's astonished senses, to be in an unusually
light-hearted frame of mind. Once or twice he laughed softly, and once,
when her hand touched his in the dark, she felt that same warm thrill
run through her as on that other moonlight night.

They came last to the big vaulted dining-room which had served as
chapel in the devotional days of the Vivalanti. The three glass doors
at the end were open to the moonlight, which flooded the apartment,
softening the crude outlines of the frescoes on the ceiling to the
beauty of old masters. Sybert paused with his back to the doors to look
up and down approvingly.

'Do you know, it isn't half bad in this light,' he remarked casually to
Marcia. 'That old fellow up there,' he nodded toward Bacchus reclining
among the vines in the central panelling, 'might be a Michelangelo in
the moonlight, and in the sunlight he isn't even a Carlo Dolci.'

Marcia stared. What could he be thinking of to choose this time of all
others to be making art criticisms? Never had she heard him express the
slightest interest in the subject before. She had been under so great a
strain for so long, such a succession of shocks, that she was nearly at
the end of her self-control. And then to have Sybert acting in this
unprecedented way! She looked past him out of the door toward the black
shadow of the ilexes, and shuddered as she thought of what they might
conceal. The next moment Sybert had stepped out on to the balcony.

'Mr. Sybert!' she cried aghast. 'They may be watching us. Come back.'

He laughed and seated himself sidewise on the iron railing. 'If they're
watching us, they're doubtless wondering why we're closing the house so
carefully. We'll stop here a few minutes and let them see we're
unsuspicious; that we're just shutting the doors for fear of draughts
and not of burglars.'

'They'll shoot you,' she gasped, her eyes upon his white suit, which
made a shining target in the moonlight.

'Nonsense, Miss Marcia! They couldn't hit me if they tried.' He marked
the distance to the grove with a calculating eye. 'There's no danger of
their trying, however. They won't risk giving their plot away just for
the sake of nabbing me; I'm not King Humbert. They don't hate me as
much as that.' He leaned forward with another laugh. 'Come out and talk
to me, Miss Marcia. Let me see how brave you are.'

Marcia flattened herself against the wall. 'I'm not brave. Please come
back, Mr. Sybert. We must tell Uncle Howard.'

If Marcia did not know Sybert to-night, he did not know himself. He was
under a greater strain than she. He had sworn that he would not see her
again, and he had weakly come to-night; he had promised himself that he
would not talk to her, that he would not by the slightest sign betray
his feelings, and he found himself thrown with her under the most
intimate conditions. They shared a secret; they were in danger
together. It was within the realms of possibility that he would be
killed to-night. The Camorrists had attempted it before; they might
succeed this time. He actually did not care; he almost welcomed the
notion. Ambition was dead within him; he had nothing to live for and he
was reckless. He thought that Marcia was in love with another man, but
he dimly divined his own influence over her. Once at least, he told
himself--once, before she went back to the boy she had chosen, she
should acknowledge his power; she should bend her will to his. He knew
that she was frightened, but she should conquer her fear. She should
come out into the moonlight and stand beside him, hand in hand, facing
the shadows of the ilex grove.

He bent forward, watching her as she stood in her white evening gown
outlined against the dark tapestry of the wall, her face surrounded by
glowing hair, her grey eyes big with amazement and fear.

He stretched out his hand toward her. 'Marcia,' he called in a low,
insistent tone. 'Come here, Marcia. Come out here and stand beside me,
or I shall think you are a coward.'

She turned aside with a little shuddering gasp and hid her head against
the wall. What if they should shoot him in the back as he sat there?

Sybert suddenly came to himself and sprang forward with an apology.
'Oh, I beg your pardon, Miss Marcia; I didn't mean to frighten you. I
don't know what I'm saying.'

He began closing the doors and shutters farthest away. As he reached
her side he paused and looked at her. Her eyes were shut and she did
not move. He closed and barred the last shutter, and they stood silent
in the dark. Marcia was struggling to control herself. 'I shall think
you a coward,' was ringing in her ears. She had borne a great deal
to-day, from the moment when she had first seen the man asleep in the
grass; and now, as she opened her eyes in the darkness, a sudden rush
of fear swept over her such as she had experienced in the old
wine-cellar. It was not fear of any definite thing; she could be as
brave as any one in the face of visible danger. It was merely a wild,
unreasoning sensation of physical terror, bred of the dark and
overwrought nerves. She stretched out her hand and touched Sybert to be
sure he was there. The next moment she was beyond herself. 'I'm
afraid,' she sobbed out, and she clung to him convulsively.

She felt him put his arm around her. 'Marcia! My dear little girl.
There's nothing to be afraid of. When they find we are on our guard
they won't dare molest us. Nothing can hurt you.' It was so exactly his
tone to Gerald, she would have laughed had she not been crying too hard
to stop. Then suddenly his arms tightened about her. 'Marcia,' he
whispered hoarsely, 'Marcia,' and he bent his head until his lips
touched hers. They stood for an instant without moving; then she felt
him become quickly rigid as he dropped his arms and gently loosened her
hands. They groped their way into the hall without a word, and neither
looked at the other. They were both ashamed. The tears still stood in
Marcia's eyes, but her cheeks were scarlet. And Sybert was pale beneath
the olive of his skin.

He stepped to the threshold of the salon. 'Ah, Copley,' he said in a
low tone. 'Are you nearly through? I want to tell you something.'

Copley waved him off without looking up. 'Sh--it's a crucial moment.
Don't interrupt. The scores are even and only one hand more to play.
I'll be out in a few minutes.'

Marcia sat down in a chair on the loggia. It was on the opposite side
of the house from the ilex grove, and besides, her spasm of fear had
passed. Everything was blotted out of her mind except what had just
happened. Her thoughts, her feelings, were in wild commotion; but one
thing stood out clearly. She had thrown herself into his arms and he
had kissed her; and then--he had unloosed her hands. She shut her eyes
and winced at the thought; she felt that she could never face him again.

And on the other end of the loggia Sybert was pacing up and down,
lighting cigarettes and throwing them away. He, too, was fiercely
calling himself names. He had frightened her when he knew that she was
beside herself with nervousness; he had taken advantage of the fact
that she did not know what she was doing; he knew that she was engaged
to Paul Dessart, and he had forgotten that he was a gentleman. With a
quick glance toward the salon, he threw away his cigarette, and
crossing the loggia, he sat down in a chair at Marcia's side. She
shrank back quickly, and he leaned forward with his elbows on his knees
and his eyes on the brick floor.

'Marcia,' he said in a tone so low that it was barely audible, 'I love
you. I know you don't care for me; I know you are engaged to another
man. I didn't mean to see you again; most of all I didn't mean to tell
you. I had no right to take advantage of you when you were off your
guard, but--I couldn't help it; I'm not so strong as I thought I was.
Please forgive me and forget about it.'

Marcia drew a deep breath and shut her eyes. Her throat suddenly felt
hot and dry. The rush of joy that swept over her made her feel that she
could face anything. She had but to say, 'I am not engaged to another
man,' and all would come right. She raised her head and looked back
into Sybert's deep eyes. It was he this time who dropped his gaze.

'Mr. Sybert----' she whispered.

A shadow suddenly fell between them, and they both sprang to their feet
with a little exclamation. A man was standing before them as
unexpectedly as though he had risen from the earth or dropped from the
sky. He was short and thick-set, with coarsely accentuated features; he
wore a loose white shirt and a red cotton sash, and though the shirt
was fastened at the throat, Marcia could see the mark of the crucifix
on his brown skin as plainly as if it were visible.

'It's the tattooed man!' she gasped out, but as she felt Sybert's
restraining touch on her arm she calmed herself.

The man took off his hat with a polite bow and an impertinent smile.

'_Buona sera_, signorina,' he murmured. '_Buona sera_, Friend of the
Poor. I'm sorry to interrupt you, but I come on business _molto
urgente_.'

'What is your business?' Sybert asked sharply.

'My business is with Signor Copley.'

'What is this? Some one to see me?' Copley asked, appearing in the
doorway. 'Well, my man,' he added in Italian, 'what can I do for you?'

'Uncle Howard, don't speak to him! It's the tattooed man,' Marcia
cried. 'There's a plot. He wants to kill you.'

An expression approaching amusement flitted over Mr. Copley's face as
he looked his visitor over.

'I wish to speak to the signore alone, in private, on urgent business,'
the man reiterated, looking scowlingly from one face to the other. He
did not understand the foreign language they spoke among themselves,
and he felt that it gave them an advantage.

'Don't speak to him alone,' Sybert warned. 'He's dangerous.'

'Well, what do you want?' Copley demanded peremptorily. 'Say whatever
you have to say here.'

The man glanced at Marcia and Sybert, and then, shrugging his shoulders
in true Italian fashion, turned to Copley.

'I wish the money of the poor,' he said.

'The money of the poor? I haven't any money of the poor.'

'_Si, si_, signore. The money you stole from the mouths of the
poor--the wheat money.'

Marcia shuddered at the word 'wheat.' It seemed to her that it would
follow her to her dying day.

'Ah! So it's the wheat money, is it? Well, my good man, that happens to
be my money. I didn't steal it from the mouths of the poor. I bought
the wheat myself to give to the poor, and I sold it for half as much as
I paid for it; and with the money I intend to buy more wheat. In the
meantime, however, I shall keep it in my own hands.'

'You don't remember me, signore, but I remember you. We met in Naples.'

Copley bowed. 'On which occasion I put you in jail--a pleasure I shall
avail myself of a second time if you trouble me any further.'

'I have come for the money.'

'You fool! Do you think I carry thirty thousand lire around in my
pockets? The money is in the _Banca d'Italia_ in Rome. You may call
there if you wish it.'

The man put his hands to his mouth and whistled.

'Ah! It's a plot, is it!' Copley exclaimed.

'_Si_, signore. It is a plot, and there are those who will carry it
out.'

He turned with an angry snarl, and before Sybert could spring forward
to stop him he had snatched a stiletto from his girdle. Copley threw up
his arm to protect himself, and received the blow in the shoulder.
Before the man could strike again, Sybert was upon him and had thrown
him backward across the balustrade. At the same moment half a dozen men
burst from the ilex grove and ran across the terrace; and one of
them--it was Pietro--levelled the stolen rifle as he ran.

'Back into the house!' Sybert shouted, 'and bar the salon windows.' He
himself sprang back to the threshold and snatched out his revolver.
'You fools!' he cried to the Italians in front. 'We're all armed men.
We'll shoot you like dogs.'

For answer Pietro fired the rifle, and the glass of an upper window
crashed.

Sybert closed the door and dropped the bar across it. He faced the
excited group in the hall with a little laugh. 'If that's a specimen of
his marksmanship, we haven't much to fear from Pietro.'

He glanced quickly from one to the other. Marcia, in the salon, was
slamming the shutters down. Mrs. Melville and Mrs. Copley were standing
in the doorway with white faces, too amazed to move. Copley, in the
middle of the hall, with his right arm hanging limp, was dripping blood
on the marble pavement while he loudly called for a pistol; and
Melville was standing on a chair hastily tearing from the wall a
collection of fourteenth-century Florentine arms.

'Pietro's got your pistol,' Sybert said. 'But I've got five shots in
mine, and we'll do for the sixth man with one of those bludgeons. I
ought to have shot that tattooed fellow when I had the chance--he's the
leader--but I'll make up for it yet.'

A storm of blows on the door behind him brought out another laugh.
'That door is as solid as the side of the house. They can hammer on it
all night without getting in.'

The assailants had evidently arrived at the same conclusion, for the
blows ceased while they consulted. A crash of glass in the salon
followed, and Sybert sprang in there, calling to Melville to guard the
hall window. The shutters held against the first impact of the men's
bodies, and they drew off for a minute and then redoubled the blows.
They were evidently using the butt of the rifle as a battering-ram, and
the stoutest of hinges could not long withstand such usage. With a
groan one side of the shutter gave way and swung inward on a single
hinge.

'Put out the lights,' Sybert called over his shoulder to Marcia, and he
fired a shot through the aperture. The assailants fell back with groans
and curses, but the next moment, raising the cry, '_Avanti! Avanti!_'
they came on with a rush, the Camorrist leading with the stolen
revolver in his hand. Sybert took deliberate aim and fired. The man
slowly sank to his knees and fell forward on his face. His comrades
dragged him back.

Marcia, in the darkness behind, shut her eyes and clenched her hands.
It was the first time she had ever seen a person die, and the sight was
sickening. The men withdrew from the window and those waiting inside
heard them consulting in low, angry guttural tones. The next moment
there was a crash of glass at the hall window which opened into the
loggia, and again the rifle as a battering-ram.

'Ah!' said Sybert under his breath, and he thrust the revolver into
Marcia's hand. 'Quick, take that to Melville and bring me one of those
spiked truncheons. We'll make 'em think we've got a regular arsenal in
here.'

Marcia obeyed without a word, and the next moment shots and cries rang
out in the hall. She had scarcely placed the unwieldy weapon in
Sybert's hands when another man thrust himself into the salon opening.
They had evidently determined to divide their forces and attack the two
breaches at once. Both Marcia and Sybert recognized the man instantly.
It was Tarquinio, the son of Domenico, the baker of Castel Vivalanti.

'Tarquinio! You fool! Go back,' Sybert cried.

'Ah-h--Signor Siberti!' the young fellow cried as he lunged forward
with a stiletto. 'You have betrayed us!'

Sybert shut his lips, and reversing the truncheon, struck him with the
handle a ringing blow on the head. Tarquinio fell forward into the
darkness of the room, and the moonlight streamed in on his bloody face.

Sybert bent over him a moment with white lips. 'You poor fool!' he
muttered. 'I had to do it.'

The next moment Marcia uttered a joyous cry that rang through the rooms.

'Listen!'

A silence of ten seconds followed, while both besieged and besiegers
held their breath. The sound was unmistakable--a shout far down the
avenue and the beat of galloping hoofs.

'The soldiers!' she cried, and the men outside, as if they had
understood the word, echoed the cry.

'_I soldati! I soldati!_'

The next moment a dozen carabinieri swept into sight, the moonlight
gleaming brightly on their white cross-belts and polished mountings.
The men on the loggia dropped their weapons and dashed for cover, while
the soldiers leaped from their horses and with spiked muskets chased
them into the trees.

Sybert hastily bent over Tarquinio and dragged him back into the shadow.

'Is he alive?' Marcia whispered.

'He's only stunned. And, poor fellow, he doesn't know any better; he
was nothing but their dupe. It's a pity to send him to the galleys for
life.'

They dropped a rug over the man and turned into the hall, which was hot
with the smell of powder and smoking candles. Sybert threw the door
wide and let the moonlight stream in. It was a queer sight it looked
upon. Copley, weak from his wound, had collapsed into a tall carved
chair, while the two ladies, in blood-stained evening dresses, were
anxiously bending over him. Melville, with the still smoking revolver
in his hand and a jewelled dagger sticking from his pocket, was
frenziedly inquiring, 'For the Lord's sake, has any one got any
whisky?' Gerald, in his white nightgown and little bare legs, was
howling dismally on the stairway; while Granton, from the landing,
looked grimly down upon the scene with the air of an avenging Nemesis.
The next moment the soldiers had come trooping in, and everything was a
babel of cries and ejaculations and excited questions. In the midst of
the confusion Mrs. Copley suddenly drew herself up and pronounced her
ultimatum.

'On the very first steamer that sails, we are going back to America to
_live_!'

Marcia uttered a little hysterical laugh, and Melville joined in.

'And I think you'd better go with them, my boy,' he said, laying a
grimy hand on Sybert's arm. 'I suspect that your goose is pretty
thoroughly cooked in Italy.'

Sybert shook the elder man's hand off, with a short laugh that was not
very mirthful.

'I've suspected that for some time.' And he turned on his heel and
strode out to the loggia, where he began talking with the soldiers.

'Poor fellow!' Melville glanced at Marcia and shook his head. 'It's a
bad dose!' he murmured. 'I have a curiosity to see with what grace he
swallows it.'

Marcia looked after Sybert with eyes that were filled with sympathy.
She realized that it was a bitter time for him, though she did not know
just why; but she had seen the spasm that crossed his face at
Tarquinio's cry, 'You have betrayed us!' She half started to follow
him, and then she drew back quickly. Through the open door she had
caught a glimpse of Sybert and a soldier bending over the Camorrist's
body. They had opened his shirt in front, and she had seen the purple
crucifix covered with blood. She leaned back against the wall, faint at
the sight. It seemed as if the impressions of this dreadful day could
never leave her!




                              CHAPTER XXV


MR. COPLEY'S wounded arm was bandaged the best that they could manage
and a soldier dispatched to Palestrina for a doctor. Gerald was put to
bed and quieted for the third time that night, and the excitement in
the house was subsiding to a murmur when Marcia came downstairs again.
Melville met her by the door of the loggia, evidently anxious that she
should not go out. She had no desire to; she had seen more than she
cared to see.

'We have caught two of the men,' he said; 'but I am afraid that the
rest have got off--that precious butler of yours among them.'

'Where is Mr. Sybert?' she asked. The thought of Tarquinio had suddenly
occurred to her; she had forgotten him in the distraction of helping
with her uncle.

'He's locking the house.'

'I will see if I can help him,' and she turned into the salon.

Melville looked after her with a momentary smile. He had a theory which
his wife did not share.

Marcia passed through the empty salon and the little ante-room, and
hesitated with her hand on the dining-room door. She had a premonition
that he was within; she turned the knob softly and entered.

Sybert sprang up with a quick exclamation. 'Oh, it's you!' he said. 'I
thought I had locked the door. Draw the bolt, please. I brought him in
here and I'm trying to bring him round. If they find him he'll be sent
to the galleys, and it seems a pity. He's got a wife and child to
support.'

Marcia looked down on the floor where Tarquinio was lying. Sybert had
thrown the glass doors open again and the moonlight was flooding the
room. A towel, folded into a rough bandage, was wrapped around the
young Italian's head, and his pale face beneath it had all the dark,
tragic beauty of his race.

'Poor man!' she exclaimed as she bent over him. 'Are you sure he's
alive?' she asked, starting back.

'Heavens, yes! It takes more than that knock to kill one of these
peasants. He groaned when I carried him in. Here, let me give him some
whisky.'

He raised the man's head and pressed the flask to his lip. Tarquinio
groaned again, and presently he opened his eyes. Sybert raised him to a
sitting posture against the wall. For a moment his glance wandered
about the room, uncomprehendingly, dully. Then, as it fixed upon
Sybert, a wild, fierce light suddenly sprang into his eyes. 'Traitor!'
he gasped out, and he struggled to his feet.

Again Marcia saw that quick look of pain shoot over Sybert's face; he
swallowed a couple of times before speaking, and when he did speak his
voice was hard and cold.

'Can you walk? Then climb over that railing and get away as fast as you
can. The soldiers are here, and if they find you they will send you to
the galleys--not that it would be any great loss,' he added with a
contemptuous laugh. 'Italy has no need of such men as you.'

Something of the fierceness faded from the young fellow's face, and he
looked back with the pleading, child-like eyes of the Italian peasant.
The two men watched each other a moment without speaking, then
Tarquinio turned to the open door with a shrug of the shoulders--Young
Italy's philosophy of life.

They stood silently looking after him as he let himself down to the
ground and unsteadily crossed the open space to the shadow of the
grove. Sybert was the first to move. He turned aside with a tired sigh
that was half a groan, and dropping into a chair, rested his elbows on
his knees and his head in his hands. All the wild buoyancy that had
kept him through the evening had left him, and there was nothing in its
place but a dull, unreasoning despair. For the last few weeks he had
been glancing at the truth askance. To-night he was looking it full in
the face. The people no longer trusted him; he could do no more good in
Italy; his work was at an end. Why had they not killed him? That would
have been the appropriate conclusion.

Marcia, watching his bowed figure, dimly divined what was going on
within his mind. She hesitated a moment, and then with a quick impulse
laid her arm about his neck. 'There isn't any one but you,' she
whispered.

He sat for a moment, motionless, and then he slowly raised his eyes to
hers. 'What do you mean, Marcia?'

'I love you.'

'And--you're free to marry me?'

She nodded.

He sprang to his feet with a deep, shuddering breath of relief. 'I've
lost Italy, Marcia, but I've found you!'

She smiled up at him through her tears, and he looked back with sombre
eyes.

'You aren't getting much of a man,' he said brokenly. 'I--was just
thinking of shooting myself.'

A quick tremor passed over her, and she drew his face down close to
hers and kissed it.

They stood for a long time on the little balcony, hand in hand, facing
the shadows of the ilex grove; but the shadows no longer seemed black,
because of the light in their own souls. He talked to her of his
past--frankly, freely--and of Italy, his adopted land. He told her what
he had tried to do and wherein he had failed. And as she listened, many
things that had puzzled her, that had seemed enigmas in his character,
assumed their right relations. The dark glass that had half hidden his
motives, that had contorted his actions, suddenly cleared before her
eyes. She saw the inherent sweetness and strength of his nature beneath
his reserve, his apparent indifference. And as he told the story of
Italy, of the sacrifices and valour and singleness of purpose that had
gone to the making of the nation, there crept involuntarily a
triumphant ring into his voice. The note of despondency that had
dominated him for the past few months disappeared; for, as he dwelt
upon the positive things that had been accomplished, they seemed to
take shape and stand out clearly against the dimmer background of
unaccomplished hopes. The remembrance of the nation's smaller mistakes
and faults and crimes had vanished in the larger view. The story that
he had to tell was the story of a great people and a great land. There
had been patriots in the past; there would be patriots in the future.
The same strength that had made the nation would build it up and carry
it on.

                  *       *       *       *       *

'Ah, Sybert! Miss Marcia!' Melville's voice rang through the house.

'I'd forgotten there was any one in the world but us,' Marcia whispered
as they turned back into the hall.

'Here's a young gentleman calling for you, Miss Marcia.' Melville's
hand rested on the shoulder of a barefooted little figure covered with
the white dust of the Roman road.

'Gervasio!' Marcia cried, with a quick spasm of self-reproach. She had
forgotten him.

The boy drew himself up proudly and pointed through the open door to
the soldiers pacing the length of the terrace.

'_Ecco!_ signorina. _I soldati!_'

Marcia dropped on her knees beside him with a little laugh. 'You
darling!' she cried as she gathered him into her arms and kissed him.

Sybert bent over him and shook his hand. 'You're a brave boy,
Gervasio,' he said; 'and you've probably saved our lives to-night.'

'Am I going to live with you now,' he asked, 'like Gerald?'

'Always,' said Marcia, 'just like Gerald.'

He opened his eyes wide. 'And will I be an Americano then?'

'No, Gervasio,' said Sybert, quickly. 'You'll never be an Americano.
You were born Italiano, and you'll be Italiano till you die. You should
be proud of it--it's your birthright. We are Americani, and we are
going--home. You may come with us and study and learn, but when you get
to be a man you must come back to your own country. It will need
you--and now run to bed. And you too, Miss Marcia,' he added. 'You are
tired and there's nothing to be done. Melville and I will attend to
locking up.'

'Locking up!' cried Melville. 'Good Lord, man, how many locking-ups
does this house require?' He watched them a moment in silence, and then
he added bluntly: 'Oh, see here, what's the good of secrets between
friends? I've known it all along.' He held out a hand to each of them.
'It's eminently fitting; my congratulations come from my heart.'

'You're too discerning by far,' Sybert retorted, his hands fast in his
pockets.

Marcia, with a laugh and a quick flush, held out both of hers. 'It's a
secret,' she said. 'I don't know how you guessed it, but you must
promise on your honour as a gentleman and a diplomat not to tell a
single soul!'

'I must tell my wife,' he pleaded. 'It's a case of "I told you so," and
she usually comes out ahead in such cases. You can't ask me to hide
what little light I have under a bushel.'

'I don't care so much about Mrs. Melville,' Marcia gave a reluctant
consent. 'But promise me one thing: that you'll never, never breathe a
word to--I don't know her name--the Lady who Writes.'

'The Lady who Writes? Who on earth is she talking about, Sybert?'

'The greatest gossip in Rome,' appended Marcia.

'Madame Laventi!' Melville laughed. 'You're too late, Miss Marcia. She
knows it already. Madame Laventi does not get her news by word of
mouth; the birds carry it to her. Good night,' he added, and he
strolled discreetly into the salon. But his caution was unnecessary;
their parting was blatantly innocent.

Sybert chose a tall brass candlestick from the row on the mantelpiece
and handed it to her with a bow.

'Thank you,' said Marcia.

She paused on the landing and smiled down.

'_Buona notte_, Signor Siberti,' she murmured.

He smiled back from the foot of the stairs.

'_Buona notte_, signorina. Pleasant dreams!'

                  *       *       *       *       *

Hearing the sound of voices within, Marcia paused at Mrs. Copley's door
to ask about her uncle. She found the room strewn with the contents of
several wardrobes, and her aunt and Granton kneeling each before an
open trunk.

'Good gracious, Aunt Katherine!' she exclaimed in amazement. 'What
_are_ you doing? It's one o'clock.'

'We are _packing_, my dear.'

Marcia sat down on the bed with a hysterical giggle. 'Aunt Katherine,
if I didn't know the contrary, I should swear you were born a Copley.'

Mrs. Copley withdrew her head from the trunk and looked about for
something further to fit in. In passing she cast her niece a
reproachful glance. 'I don't see how you can be so flippant, Marcia,
after what we've been through to-night--and with your uncle lying
wounded in the next room! It's only one chance in a hundred that we
aren't all in our graves by now. I shall not draw an easy breath until
we have landed safely in the streets of New York. Just hand me that
pile of things on the chair there.' Her gaze rested upon a
parti-coloured assortment of ribbons and laces and gloves.

Marcia suppressed another smile. 'I know it isn't the time to laugh,
Aunt Katherine, but I can't help it. You're so--sort of businesslike.
It never would have occurred to me to pack to-night.'

'We are going into Rome the first thing to-morrow morning, and with
only Granton to help there is no time to lose. We might as well begin
while we are waiting for the doctor--he surely ought to be here by
now,' she added, her anxiety coming to the fore. 'What do you suppose
takes him so long? It's been an hour since we sent.'

'It's four miles to Palestrina, Aunt Katherine. And you must remember
it's the middle of the night; the man was probably in bed and asleep.
It will be another half hour at least before he can get here.'

'Yes, I suppose so'--Mrs. Copley turned back to her packing--'but I
can't help being worried! One suspects everybody after an experience
like this. I am really feeling very nervous over your uncle's arm; he
makes light of it, but it may be more serious than any of us think.
There's always so much danger of lockjaw or blood-poisoning from a
wound of that sort. I shall not feel satisfied about it until we can
get into Rome and consult an American doctor.'

'May I see him?' Marcia asked, 'or is he asleep?'

'No, he's awake; but you must not excite him.'

Marcia tapped lightly on Mr. Copley's door and entered. He was propped
up on pillows, his arm in a sling. She crossed over and sat down on the
edge of the bed. 'I'm so sorry, Uncle Howard,' she murmured.

'Oh, it's nothing to make a fuss over. I got off very easily.'

'I don't mean just your arm--I mean--everything.'

'Ah,' said Copley, and shut his eyes.

'But, after all,' she added, 'it may be for the best. The Italians
don't understand what you are doing. I don't believe two such different
races can understand each other.'

He opened his eyes with a humorous smile. 'It's rather a comic-opera
ending,' he agreed. 'I have a feeling that before the curtain goes down
I should join hands with the bandits and come out and make my bow.'

'There are lots of things to be done in America, and they'll appreciate
you more at home.'

'I think I'll buy a yacht and go in for racing, as your aunt suggests.
I may come off in that--if I have a captain.'

Marcia sat silent a moment, looking down on his finely lined, sensitive
face.

'Uncle Howard,' she said slowly, 'it seems as if the good you do is
some way cast up to the credit side of the world's account and helps
just so much to overcome the bad, whether any one knows about it or
not. You may go away and leave it all behind and never be appreciated,
but it's a positive quantity just the same. It's so much accomplished
on the right side.'

Her uncle smiled again.

'I'm afraid that's rather too idealistic a philosophy for this
generation. We're living in a material age, and it takes something more
solid than good intentions to make much impression on it. I have a
sneaking suspicion that I wasn't born to set the world to rights. Many
men are reformers in their youth, but I'm reaching the age when a club
and a good dinner are excellent anodynes for my own and other people's
troubles.'

A shadow fell over her face and she looked down in her lap without
answering.

After a moment he asked suddenly, 'Where's Sybert, Marcia?'

'I think he's downstairs waiting for the doctor.'

'Ah!' said Copley again, with a little sigh.

Marcia slipped down on her knees beside the bed. 'Uncle Howard,' she
whispered, 'I want to tell you something. I'm--going to marry Mr.
Sybert.'

Copley raised himself on his elbow and stared at her.

'You are going to marry Sybert?' he repeated incredulously.

'Yes, uncle,' she smiled. 'He asked me to.'

'Sybert!' Copley repeated, with an astonished laugh. 'Holy St. Francis!
What a change is here!'

'I thought you would be pleased,' she said a little tremulously.

He stretched out his hand and laid it over hers. 'My dear Marcia,
nothing could have pleased me more. He's the finest man I have ever
known, and I begin to suspect that you are the finest girl. But--good
gracious! Marcia, I must be blind and deaf and dumb. I had a notion you
didn't like each other.'

'We've changed our minds,' she said; 'and I wanted you to know it
because I thought it would make you feel better.'

'And so it does, Marcia,' he said heartily. 'The year has accomplished
something, after all; and I'm glad for Sybert's sake that he's got this
just now, for, poor fellow, he's in a deeper hole than I.'

Marcia pressed his hand gratefully as her aunt came bustling in with
her arms full of clothes.

'Howard,' she asked, 'shall I have Granton pack your heavy flannels, or
shall you want them on the steamer?'

Her husband attempted a shrug and found the bandages would not permit
it.

'I think perhaps I'd better leave them out. It's June, of course; but
I've known very cold crossings even in July.'

Copley turned on his side and wrenched his arm again.

'Oh, for heaven's sake! Katherine,' he groaned, 'pack them, throw them
away, burn them, do anything you please.'

Mrs. Copley came to the bedside and bent over him anxiously. 'What's
the matter, dear? Is your arm very painful? You don't suppose,' she
added in sudden alarm, that the stiletto was poisoned, do you?'

'Lord, no!' he laughed. 'Poisoned daggers went out two centuries
ago--it's a mere scratch, Katherine; don't worry about it. Go on with
your packing--I should hate to miss that first steamer.'

His wife patted the pillows and turned toward the door. 'Marcia,' she
called over her shoulder, 'go to bed, child. You will be absolutely
worn out to-morrow--and don't talk to your uncle any more. I'm afraid
you will get him excited.'

Marcia bent over and lightly kissed him on the forehead. 'Good night,'
she whispered. 'I hope you will feel better in the morning,' and she
turned back to her own room.

She sat down on the couch by the open window and drew the muslin
curtains back. The moon was low in the west, hanging over Rome. A cool
night breeze was stirring, and the little chill that precedes dawn was
in the air. She drew a rug about her and sat looking out, listening to
the shuffling tramp of the soldiers and thinking of the long day that
had passed. When she waked that morning it had been like any other day,
and now everything was changed. This was her last night in the villa,
and her heart was full of happiness and sorrow--sorrow for her uncle
and Laurence Sybert and the poor peasants. It was Italy to the
end--beauty and moonlight and love, mingled with tragedy and death and
disappointment. She had a great many things to think about, but she was
very, very tired, and with a half-sigh and a half-smile her head
drooped on the cushions and she fell asleep.




                              CHAPTER XXVI


MARCIA woke at dawn with the sun in her eyes. She started up dazedly at
finding herself dressed in her white evening gown, lying on the couch
instead of in bed. Then in a moment the events of yesterday flashed
back. The floor was covered with broken glass, and on the wall opposite
a dark spot among the rose-garlands showed where Pietro's misaimed
bullet had lodged. On the terrace balustrade below her window two
soldiers were sitting, busily throwing dice. They lent an absurd air of
unreality to the scene. She stepped to the open doors of the balcony
and drew a deep, delighted breath of the fresh morning air. Rome in the
west was still sleeping, but every separate crag of the Sabines was
glowing a soft pink, and the newly risen sun was hanging like a halo
behind the old monastery. It was a day filled with promise.

The next moment she had brought her thoughts back from the distant
horizon to the contemplation of homelier matters nearer at hand.
Mingled with the early fragrance of roses and dew was the subtly
penetrating odour of boiling coffee. Marcia sniffed and considered.
Some one was making coffee for the soldiers, who were to be relieved at
the 'Ave Maria.' She reviewed the possible cooks. Not Granton. The
soldiers were Italians, and, for all Granton cared, they could perish
from hunger on their way back to Palestrina. Not her aunt. In all
probability, she did not know how to make coffee. Not her uncle. He was
_hors de concours_ with his wounded arm. The Melvilles! They would not
have known where to look for the kitchen. She interrupted her
speculations to exchange last night's evening gown for a fresh blue
muslin, and her hasty glance at the mirror as she stole out on tiptoe
told her that the slight pallor which comes from three hours' sleep was
not unbecoming. She crept downstairs through the dim hall and paused a
second by the open door of the loggia; her eyes involuntarily sought
the spot outside the salon window. The rug was back in its place again,
and everything was in its usual order. She felt thankful to some one;
it was easier so to throw the matter from her mind.

She approached the kitchen softly and paused on the threshold with a
reconnoitring glance. The big stone-floored room, with its smoky
rafters overhead, was dark always, but especially so at the sunrise
hour; its deep-embrasured windows looked to the west. In the farthest,
darkest corner, before the big, brick-walled stove, some one was
standing with his back turned toward her, and her heart quickened its
beating perceptibly. She stood very still for several minutes, watching
him; she would hypnotise him to turn around; but before she had fairly
commenced with the business, he had picked up the poker by the wrong
end and dropped it again. The observation which he made in Italian was
quite untranslatable. Marcia tittered and he wheeled about.

'That's not fair,' he objected. 'I shouldn't have said anything so bad
if I had known you were listening.'

'Do you know what we do with Gerald when he swears in Italian?'

He shook his head.

'We wash his mouth with soap.'

'I hope it doesn't happen often,' he shuddered.

'He speaks very fluent Italian--nearly as fluent as yours.'

'Suppose we change the subject.'

'Very well,' she agreed, advancing to the opposite side of the long
central table. 'What shall we talk about?'

'We haven't said good morning.'

She dropped him a smiling curtsy. 'Good morning, Mr. Sybert.'

'Mr. Sybert! You haven't changed your mind overnight, have you?'

Her eyes were more reassuring than her speech. 'N-no.'

'No what?'

'_Sir!_' She laughed.

He came around to her side of the table, and faced her with his hands
in his jacket pockets.

'You've never in your life pronounced my name. I don't believe you know
it!'

She whispered.

'Say it louder.'

'It sounds too familiar,' she objected, backing against the wall with
impudently laughing eyes. 'You're so--so sort of old--like Uncle
Howard.'

'Oh, I know you're young, but you needn't put on such airs about it.
You don't own all the youth in the world.'

'Thirty-five!' she murmured, with a wondering shake of her head.

'Ah--thirty-five. A very nice age. Just the right age, in fact, to make
you mind me. Oh, you needn't laugh; I'm going to do it fast enough. And
right here we'll begin.' He folded his arms with a very fierce frown,
but with a smile on his lips, quizzical, humorous, comprehending,
kindly--the finished result of so many smiles that had gone before.
'The business in hand, my dear young woman, is to find out whether or
not you happen to know the name of the man you've promised to marry.
Come, let me hear it; say it out loud.'

Marcia looked back tantalizingly a moment, and then, after an inquiring
glance about the room as if she were searching to recall it, she
dropped her lids and pronounced it with her eyes on the floor.

'Laurence.'

He unfolded his arms.

'The coffee's boiling over!' Marcia exclaimed.

'Kiss me good morning.'

'The coffee's boiling over.'

'I don't care if it is.'

The coffee boiled over with an angry spurt that deluged the stove with
hissing steam. Marcia was patently too anxious for its safety to give
her attention to anything else. Sybert stalked over and viciously
jerked it back, and she picked up the plate of rolls and ran for the
door. He caught up with her in the hall.

'I know why you discharged Marietta,' he threw out.

'Why?'

'If I were a French cook with a moustache and a goatee and a fetching
white cap, and you were a black-eyed little Italian nursemaid with gold
ear-rings in your ears, I should very frequently let things burn.'

'Oh,' Marcia laughed. 'And I should probably let the little boy I ought
to be looking after fall over the balustrade and break his front tooth
while I was sitting on the door-step smiling at you.'

'And so we should be torn apart--_there_ was a tragedy!' he mused
compassionately. 'I hadn't realized it before. It proves that you must
suffer yourself before you can appreciate the sufferings of others.'

'French cooks with fetching caps have elastic hearts.'

'Ah,' said he, 'and so have black-eyed little Italian nursemaids--I'm
glad you're not an Italian nursemaid, Marcia.'

'I'm glad you're not a French cook--Laurence.' And then she laughed.
'Will you tell me something?'

'Anything you wish.'

'Were you ever in love with the Contessa Torrenieri?'

'I used to fancy I was something of the sort nine or ten years ago.
But, thank heaven, she was looking for a count.'

'I'm glad she found him!' Marcia breathed.

As they crossed the terrace to the little table at the corner of the
grove where the afternoon before--it seemed a century--Mrs. Copley and
Marcia had taken tea, one of the soldiers came hastily forward. 'Permit
me, signorina,' he said with a bow, taking the plate from her hands.
Marcia relinquished it with a '_Grazia tanto_' and a friendly smile.
They were so polite, so good-natured, these Italians! Cups were
brought, the table was spread, and Marcia poured the coffee with as
much ceremony as if she were presiding at an afternoon reception. The
two, at the soldiers' invitation, stayed and shared the meal with them.
Marcia never forgot that sunrise breakfast-party on the terrace--it was
Villa Vivalanti's last social function.

She watched Sybert's intercourse with these men with something like
amazement, feeling that she had still to know him, that, his character
was in the end the mystery it had seemed. With his hand on their
shoulders, he was chatting to the group as if he had known them all his
life, cordial, friendly, intimate, with an air of good-comradeship, of
perfect comprehension, that she had never seen him employ toward even
his staunchest friends of the Embassy. One of the soldiers, noticing
the direction of her glance, informed her that the signore had been up
all night, alternately talking to them and pacing the walks of the ilex
grove, and he added that the signore was a _galantuomo_--a gentleman
and a good fellow.

'What did he talk about?' she asked.

'Many, many things,' said the man. 'Italia, and the people's _miseria_,
and the priests, and the wine of Sicily, and the King and the Camorra,
and (he looked a trifle conscious) our sweethearts. He is not like
other _forestieri_, the signore; he understands. He is a good fellow.'

And then the young soldier--he was most confiding--told her about his
own sweetheart. Her name was Lucia and she lived in Lucca. She was
waiting for him to finish his service, and then they would be married
and keep a carved-wood shop in Florence. That was his trade--carving
wood to sell to the _forestieri_. It was a beautiful trade; he had
learned it in Switzerland, and he had learned it well. The signorina
should judge if she ever came to Florence. How much longer did he have
to serve? Four months, and then!--He rolled his eyes in the direction
where Lucca might be supposed to lie.

Marcia smiled sympathetically. Lucia was a beautiful name, she said.

Was it not a beautiful name? he returned in an ecstasy. But the
signorina should see Lucia herself! Words failed him at this point.
'Santa Lucia,' he murmured softly, and he hummed the tune under his
breath.

Marcia unclasped a chain of gold beads from her neck and slipped it
into his hand. 'When you go back to Lucca give this to Lucia from
me--_con amore_.'

'Here, here! what is this?' said Sybert in English, coming up behind.
'Do I find you giving love-tokens to a strange young man?'

Marcia flushed guiltily at the detection. 'It's for a friend of mine in
Lucca,' she said, nodding over her shoulder to the young soldier as
they turned back toward the loggia.

Sybert laughed softly.

'What are you laughing at?' she asked.

'I sent a wedding present to Lucia myself.'

They strolled to the end of the loggia and stood by the balustrade,
looking off into the hills. The fresh, dewy scents of early morning
were in the air, and all the world seemed beautiful and young. Marcia
thought of Sybert pacing up and down the dark ilex walks while the
villa slept, and of the dreadful thing he had spoken last night in that
wild moment of despair. She searched his face questioningly. There were
shadows under his eyes, the marks of last night's vigil; but in his
eyes a steady calm. He caught the look and read her thoughts.

'That's all over, Marcia,' he said quietly. 'I've fought it out. You
mustn't think of it again. I don't very often lose control of myself,
but I did last night. Once in thirty-five years,' he smiled, 'a man
ought to be forgiven for being a little melodramatic.'

'Will you--really be happy?' she asked.

'Marcia, America is for me, as for so many poor Italians, the promised
land. I'm going home to you.'

She shook her head sadly. 'That--won't be enough.'

'It's all I have, and it's all I want. There's not room in my heart for
anything but you, Marcia.'

'Don't say that,' she cried. 'That's why I love you--because there's
room in your heart for so many other people. America is your own
country. Let it take the place of Italy.'

He studied the Campagna, silent, a moment, while a shadow crossed his
face. He shook his head slowly and looked back with melancholy eyes.

'I don't know, Marcia. That may come later--but--not just now. You
can't understand what Italy means to me. I was born here; I learned to
speak the language before I did English; all that other men feel for
their country, for their homes, I feel for Italy. And these poor,
hard-working, patient people--I've done them harm instead of good. Oh,
I see the truth; Italy must do for herself. The foreigners can't help,
and I'm a foreigner like the rest.'

'Ah, Laurence,' she pleaded, 'don't you see that you're an American,
and that nothing, nothing can stamp it out? It's all a mistake; your
place isn't here--it's at home. Every man can surely do his best work
in his own country, and America needs good men. Do you remember what
you said at Uncle Howard's dinner that last night we were in Rome? That
to be a loyal citizen of the world was the best a man could do? But you
can't be a loyal citizen of the world unless you are first of all a
loyal citizen of your own country. America may be crude and it may have
a good many faults, but it's our country just the same, and we ought to
love it better than any other. You do love it, don't you? Tell me you
do. Tell me you're glad that you're an American.'

She put her hands on his shoulders and looked up with glowing eyes and
cheeks that burned.

As he watched her a picture flashed over him of what it meant. He
thought of the vast country, with its richness, its possibilities, its
contrasts. He thought of its vitality and force; its energy and
nervousness and daring. And for a brief instant he felt himself a part
of it. A sudden wave swept over him of that strange, irrational,
romantic love of fatherland which is fundamental underneath the polish,
underneath the wickedness, in every man in every land. For a second he
thrilled with it too; and then, as his eye wandered to the great plain
beneath them, the old love--his first love--rushed back. He bent over
and kissed her with sudden tears in his eyes.

'Some day, Marcia, I will tell you that I'm proud to be an American.
Don't ask me just yet.'

And as they stood there, hand in hand, there was borne to them from the
mountain-top above the sweet, prophetic sound of the bells of Castel
Vivalanti ringing the Angelus; while below them on the horizon, like a
great, far-reaching sea, stretched the Campagna, haunting, mysterious,
insatiable--the Roman Campagna, that has demanded as sacrifice the
lives of so many miserable peasants, that has lured from distant homes
so many strangers and held them prisoners to its spell--the beautiful,
deadly, desolate land that has inspired more passionate love than any
land on earth.

       PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
       BRUNSWICK ST., STAMFORD ST., S.E. 1, AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcriber's Notes:

Punctuation errors repaired. Varied hyphenation was retained.

Page 12, "Father" changed to "Farther" (Farther away than)

Page 41, "Vhandeliers" changed to "chandeliers" (chandeliers of the
latter)

Page 49, "isesta" changed to "siesta" (siesta at noon)

Page 105, "peeple" changed to "people" (stirring up the people)

Page 119,

                    '"Jammo ncappa, jammo, ja . . .
                      Funiclui--funicula."'

changed to

                    '"Jammo 'ncoppa, jammo ja . . .
                      Funiculi--funicula."'

Page 150, "Heathcliffe" changed to "Heathcliff" (he's exactly like
Heathcliff)

Page 248, "other's" changed to "other" (other people's troubles)

Page 254, "mind" changed to "mind" (of mine in Lucca)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wheat Princess, by Jean Webster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHEAT PRINCESS ***

***** This file should be named 46761.txt or 46761.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/7/6/46761/

Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

