The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Half-Brothers, by Elizabeth Gaskell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Half-Brothers


Author: Elizabeth Gaskell

Release Date: May 18, 2005  [eBook #2532]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HALF-BROTHERS***







Transcribed from the 1896 Smith, Elder and Co. "Lizzie Leigh and Other
Tales" edition by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk.  Proofed by
Jennifer Lee, Alev Akman and Andy Wallace.





THE HALF-BROTHERS
by Elizabeth Gaskell


My mother was twice married.  She never spoke of her first husband, and
it is only from other people that I have learnt what little I know about
him.  I believe she was scarcely seventeen when she was married to him:
and he was barely one-and-twenty.  He rented a small farm up in
Cumberland, somewhere towards the sea-coast; but he was perhaps too young
and inexperienced to have the charge of land and cattle: anyhow, his
affairs did not prosper, and he fell into ill health, and died of
consumption before they had been three years man and wife, leaving my
mother a young widow of twenty, with a little child only just able to
walk, and the farm on her hands for four years more by the lease, with
half the stock on it dead, or sold off one by one to pay the more
pressing debts, and with no money to purchase more, or even to buy the
provisions needed for the small consumption of every day.  There was
another child coming, too; and sad and sorry, I believe, she was to think
of it.  A dreary winter she must have had in her lonesome dwelling, with
never another near it for miles around; her sister came to bear her
company, and they two planned and plotted how to make every penny they
could raise go as far as possible.  I can't tell you how it happened that
my little sister, whom I never saw, came to sicken and die; but, as if my
poor mother's cup was not full enough, only a fortnight before Gregory
was born the little girl took ill of scarlet fever, and in a week she lay
dead.  My mother was, I believe, just stunned with this last blow.  My
aunt has told me that she did not cry; aunt Fanny would have been
thankful if she had; but she sat holding the poor wee lassie's hand and
looking in her pretty, pale, dead face, without so much as shedding a
tear.  And it was all the same, when they had to take her away to be
buried.  She just kissed the child, and sat her down in the window-seat
to watch the little black train of people (neighbours--my aunt, and one
far-off cousin, who were all the friends they could muster) go winding
away amongst the snow, which had fallen thinly over the country the night
before.  When my aunt came back from the funeral, she found my mother in
the same place, and as dry-eyed as ever.  So she continued until after
Gregory was born; and, somehow, his coming seemed to loosen the tears,
and she cried day and night, till my aunt and the other watcher looked at
each other in dismay, and would fain have stopped her if they had but
known how.  But she bade them let her alone, and not be over-anxious, for
every drop she shed eased her brain, which had been in a terrible state
before for want of the power to cry.  She seemed after that to think of
nothing but her new little baby; she had hardly appeared to remember
either her husband or her little daughter that lay dead in Brigham
churchyard--at least so aunt Fanny said, but she was a great talker, and
my mother was very silent by nature, and I think aunt Fanny may have been
mistaken in believing that my mother never thought of her husband and
child just because she never spoke about them.  Aunt Fanny was older than
my mother, and had a way of treating her like a child; but, for all that,
she was a kind, warm-hearted creature, who thought more of her sister's
welfare than she did of her own and it was on her bit of money that they
principally lived, and on what the two could earn by working for the
great Glasgow sewing-merchants.  But by-and-by my mother's eye-sight
began to fail.  It was not that she was exactly blind, for she could see
well enough to guide herself about the house, and to do a good deal of
domestic work; but she could no longer do fine sewing and earn money.  It
must have been with the heavy crying she had had in her day, for she was
but a young creature at this time, and as pretty a young woman, I have
heard people say, as any on the country side.  She took it sadly to heart
that she could no longer gain anything towards the keep of herself and
her child.  My aunt Fanny would fain have persuaded her that she had
enough to do in managing their cottage and minding Gregory; but my mother
knew that they were pinched, and that aunt Fanny herself had not as much
to eat, even of the commonest kind of food, as she could have done with;
and as for Gregory, he was not a strong lad, and needed, not more
food--for he always had enough, whoever went short--but better
nourishment, and more flesh-meat.  One day--it was aunt Fanny who told me
all this about my poor mother, long after her death--as the sisters were
sitting together, aunt Fanny working, and my mother hushing Gregory to
sleep, William Preston, who was afterwards my father, came in.  He was
reckoned an old bachelor; I suppose he was long past forty, and he was
one of the wealthiest farmers thereabouts, and had known my grandfather
well, and my mother and my aunt in their more prosperous days.  He sat
down, and began to twirl his hat by way of being agreeable; my aunt Fanny
talked, and he listened and looked at my mother.  But he said very
little, either on that visit, or on many another that he paid before he
spoke out what had been the real purpose of his calling so often all
along, and from the very first time he came to their house.  One Sunday,
however, my aunt Fanny stayed away from church, and took care of the
child, and my mother went alone.  When she came back, she ran straight
upstairs, without going into the kitchen to look at Gregory or speak any
word to her sister, and aunt Fanny heard her cry as if her heart was
breaking; so she went up and scolded her right well through the bolted
door, till at last she got her to open it.  And then she threw herself on
my aunt's neck, and told her that William Preston had asked her to marry
him, and had promised to take good charge of her boy, and to let him want
for nothing, neither in the way of keep nor of education, and that she
had consented.  Aunt Fanny was a good deal shocked at this; for, as I
have said, she had often thought that my mother had forgotten her first
husband very quickly, and now here was proof positive of it, if she could
so soon think of marrying again.  Besides as aunt Fanny used to say, she
herself would have been a far more suitable match for a man of William
Preston's age than Helen, who, though she was a widow, had not seen her
four-and-twentieth summer.  However, as aunt Fanny said, they had not
asked her advice; and there was much to be said on the other side of the
question.  Helen's eyesight would never be good for much again, and as
William Preston's wife she would never need to do anything, if she chose
to sit with her hands before her; and a boy was a great charge to a
widowed mother; and now there would be a decent steady man to see after
him.  So, by-and-by, aunt Fanny seemed to take a brighter view of the
marriage than did my mother herself, who hardly ever looked up, and never
smiled after the day when she promised William Preston to be his wife.
But much as she had loved Gregory before, she seemed to love him more
now.  She was continually talking to him when they were alone, though he
was far too young to understand her moaning words, or give her any
comfort, except by his caresses.

At last William Preston and she were wed; and she went to be mistress of
a well-stocked house, not above half-an-hour's walk from where aunt Fanny
lived.  I believe she did all that she could to please my father; and a
more dutiful wife, I have heard him himself say, could never have been.
But she did not love him, and he soon found it out.  She loved Gregory,
and she did not love him.  Perhaps, love would have come in time, if he
had been patient enough to wait; but it just turned him sour to see how
her eye brightened and her colour came at the sight of that little child,
while for him who had given her so much, she had only gentle words as
cold as ice.  He got to taunt her with the difference in her manner, as
if that would bring love: and he took a positive dislike to Gregory,--he
was so jealous of the ready love that always gushed out like a spring of
fresh water when he came near.  He wanted her to love him more, and
perhaps that was all well and good; but he wanted her to love her child
less, and that was an evil wish.  One day, he gave way to his temper, and
cursed and swore at Gregory, who had got into some mischief, as children
will; my mother made some excuse for him; my father said it was hard
enough to have to keep another man's child, without having it perpetually
held up in its naughtiness by his wife, who ought to be always in the
same mind that he was; and so from little they got to more; and the end
of it was, that my mother took to her bed before her time, and I was born
that very day.  My father was glad, and proud, and sorry, all in a
breath; glad and proud that a son was born to him; and sorry for his poor
wife's state, and to think how his angry words had brought it on.  But he
was a man who liked better to be angry than sorry, so he soon found out
that it was all Gregory's fault, and owed him an additional grudge for
having hastened my birth.  He had another grudge against him before long.
My mother began to sink the day after I was born.  My father sent to
Carlisle for doctors, and would have coined his heart's blood into gold
to save her, if that could have been; but it could not.  My aunt Fanny
used to say sometimes, that she thought that Helen did not wish to live,
and so just let herself die away without trying to take hold on life; but
when I questioned her, she owned that my mother did all the doctors bade
her do, with the same sort of uncomplaining patience with which she had
acted through life.  One of her last requests was to have Gregory laid in
her bed by my side, and then she made him take hold of my little hand.
Her husband came in while she was looking at us so, and when he bent
tenderly over her to ask her how she felt now, and seemed to gaze on us
two little half-brothers, with a grave sort of kindness, she looked up in
his face and smiled, almost her first smile at him; and such a sweet
smile! as more besides aunt Fanny have said.  In an hour she was dead.
Aunt Fanny came to live with us.  It was the best thing that could be
done.  My father would have been glad to return to his old mode of
bachelor life, but what could he do with two little children?  He needed
a woman to take care of him, and who so fitting as his wife's elder
sister?  So she had the charge of me from my birth; and for a time I was
weakly, as was but natural, and she was always beside me, night and day
watching over me, and my father nearly as anxious as she.  For his land
had come down from father to son for more than three hundred years, and
he would have cared for me merely as his flesh and blood that was to
inherit the land after him.  But he needed something to love, for all
that, to most people, he was a stern, hard man, and he took to me as, I
fancy, he had taken to no human being before--as he might have taken to
my mother, if she had had no former life for him to be jealous of.  I
loved him back again right heartily.  I loved all around me, I believe,
for everybody was kind to me.  After a time, I overcame my original
weakness of constitution, and was just a bonny, strong-looking lad whom
every passer-by noticed, when my father took me with him to the nearest
town.

At home I was the darling of my aunt, the tenderly-beloved of my father,
the pet and plaything of the old domestics, the "young master" of the
farm-labourers, before whom I played many a lordly antic, assuming a sort
of authority which sat oddly enough, I doubt not, on such a baby as I
was.

Gregory was three years older than I.  Aunt Fanny was always kind to him
in deed and in action, but she did not often think about him, she had
fallen so completely into the habit of being engrossed by me, from the
fact of my having come into her charge as a delicate baby.  My father
never got over his grudging dislike to his stepson, who had so innocently
wrestled with him for the possession of my mother's heart.  I mistrust
me, too, that my father always considered him as the cause of my mother's
death and my early delicacy; and utterly unreasonable as this may seem, I
believe my father rather cherished his feeling of alienation to my
brother as a duty, than strove to repress it.  Yet not for the world
would my father have grudged him anything that money could purchase.  That
was, as it were, in the bond when he had wedded my mother.  Gregory was
lumpish and loutish, awkward and ungainly, marring whatever he meddled
in, and many a hard word and sharp scolding did he get from the people
about the farm, who hardly waited till my father's back was turned before
they rated the stepson.  I am ashamed--my heart is sore to think how I
fell into the fashion of the family, and slighted my poor orphan step-
brother.  I don't think I ever scouted him, or was wilfully ill-natured
to him; but the habit of being considered in all things, and being
treated as something uncommon and superior, made me insolent in my
prosperity, and I exacted more than Gregory was always willing to grant,
and then, irritated, I sometimes repeated the disparaging words I had
heard others use with regard to him, without fully understanding their
meaning.  Whether he did or not I cannot tell.  I am afraid he did.  He
used to turn silent and quiet--sullen and sulky, my father thought it:
stupid, aunt Fanny used to call it.  But every one said he was stupid and
dull, and this stupidity and dullness grew upon him.  He would sit
without speaking a word, sometimes, for hours; then my father would bid
him rise and do some piece of work, maybe, about the farm.  And he would
take three or four tellings before he would go.  When we were sent to
school, it was all the same.  He could never be made to remember his
lessons; the school-master grew weary of scolding and flogging, and at
last advised my father just to take him away, and set him to some farm-
work that might not be above his comprehension.  I think he was more
gloomy and stupid than ever after this, yet he was not a cross lad; he
was patient and good-natured, and would try to do a kind turn for any
one, even if they had been scolding or cuffing him not a minute before.
But very often his attempts at kindness ended in some mischief to the
very people he was trying to serve, owing to his awkward, ungainly ways.
I suppose I was a clever lad; at any rate, I always got plenty of praise;
and was, as we called it, the cock of the school.  The schoolmaster said
I could learn anything I chose, but my father, who had no great learning
himself, saw little use in much for me, and took me away betimes, and
kept me with him about the farm.  Gregory was made into a kind of
shepherd, receiving his training under old Adam, who was nearly past his
work.  I think old Adam was almost the first person who had a good
opinion of Gregory.  He stood to it that my brother had good parts,
though he did not rightly know how to bring them out; and, for knowing
the bearings of the Fells, he said he had never seen a lad like him.  My
father would try to bring Adam round to speak of Gregory's faults and
shortcomings; but, instead of that, he would praise him twice as much, as
soon as he found out what was my father's object.

One winter-time, when I was about sixteen, and Gregory nineteen, I was
sent by my father on an errand to a place about seven miles distant by
the road, but only about four by the Fells.  He bade me return by the
road, whichever way I took in going, for the evenings closed in early,
and were often thick and misty; besides which, old Adam, now paralytic
and bedridden, foretold a downfall of snow before long.  I soon got to my
journey's end, and soon had done my business; earlier by an hour, I
thought, than my father had expected, so I took the decision of the way
by which I would return into my own hands, and set off back again over
the Fells, just as the first shades of evening began to fall.  It looked
dark and gloomy enough; but everything was so still that I thought I
should have plenty of time to get home before the snow came down.  Off I
set at a pretty quick pace.  But night came on quicker.  The right path
was clear enough in the day-time, although at several points two or three
exactly similar diverged from the same place; but when there was a good
light, the traveller was guided by the sight of distant objects,--a piece
of rock,--a fall in the ground--which were quite invisible to me now.  I
plucked up a brave heart, however, and took what seemed to me the right
road.  It was wrong, nevertheless, and led me whither I knew not, but to
some wild boggy moor where the solitude seemed painful, intense, as if
never footfall of man had come thither to break the silence.  I tried to
shout--with the dimmest possible hope of being heard--rather to reassure
myself by the sound of my own voice; but my voice came husky and short,
and yet it dismayed me; it seemed so weird and strange, in that noiseless
expanse of black darkness.  Suddenly the air was filled thick with dusky
flakes, my face and hands were wet with snow.  It cut me off from the
slightest knowledge of where I was, for I lost every idea of the
direction from which I had come, so that I could not even retrace my
steps; it hemmed me in, thicker, thicker, with a darkness that might be
felt.  The boggy soil on which I stood quaked under me if I remained long
in one place, and yet I dared not move far.  All my youthful hardiness
seemed to leave me at once.  I was on the point of crying, and only very
shame seemed to keep it down.  To save myself from shedding tears, I
shouted--terrible, wild shouts for bare life they were.  I turned sick as
I paused to listen; no answering sound came but the unfeeling echoes.
Only the noiseless, pitiless snow kept falling thicker, thicker--faster,
faster!  I was growing numb and sleepy.  I tried to move about, but I
dared not go far, for fear of the precipices which, I knew, abounded in
certain places on the Fells.  Now and then, I stood still and shouted
again; but my voice was getting choked with tears, as I thought of the
desolate helpless death I was to die, and how little they at home,
sitting round the warm, red, bright fire, wotted what was become of
me,--and how my poor father would grieve for me--it would surely kill
him--it would break his heart, poor old man!  Aunt Fanny too--was this to
be the end of all her cares for me?  I began to review my life in a
strange kind of vivid dream, in which the various scenes of my few boyish
years passed before me like visions.  In a pang of agony, caused by such
remembrance of my short life, I gathered up my strength and called out
once more, a long, despairing, wailing cry, to which I had no hope of
obtaining any answer, save from the echoes around, dulled as the sound
might be by the thickened air.  To my surprise I heard a cry--almost as
long, as wild as mine--so wild that it seemed unearthly, and I almost
thought it must be the voice of some of the mocking spirits of the Fells,
about whom I had heard so many tales.  My heart suddenly began to beat
fast and loud.  I could not reply for a minute or two.  I nearly fancied
I had lost the power of utterance.  Just at this moment a dog barked.  Was
it Lassie's bark--my brother's collie?--an ugly enough brute, with a
white, ill-looking face, that my father always kicked whenever he saw it,
partly for its own demerits, partly because it belonged to my brother.  On
such occasions, Gregory would whistle Lassie away, and go off and sit
with her in some outhouse.  My father had once or twice been ashamed of
himself, when the poor collie had yowled out with the suddenness of the
pain, and had relieved himself of his self-reproach by blaming my
brother, who, he said, had no notion of training a dog, and was enough to
ruin any collie in Christendom with his stupid way of allowing them to
lie by the kitchen fire.  To all which Gregory would answer nothing, nor
even seem to hear, but go on looking absent and moody.

Yes! there again!  It was Lassie's bark!  Now or never!  I lifted up my
voice and shouted "Lassie! Lassie! for God's sake, Lassie!" Another
moment, and the great white-faced Lassie was curving and gambolling with
delight round my feet and legs, looking, however, up in my face with her
intelligent, apprehensive eyes, as if fearing lest I might greet her with
a blow, as I had done oftentimes before.  But I cried with gladness, as I
stooped down and patted her.  My mind was sharing in my body's weakness,
and I could not reason, but I knew that help was at hand.  A gray figure
came more and more distinctly out of the thick, close-pressing darkness.
It was Gregory wrapped in his maud.

"Oh, Gregory!" said I, and I fell upon his neck, unable to speak another
word.  He never spoke much, and made me no answer for some little time.
Then he told me we must move, we must walk for the dear life--we must
find our road home, if possible; but we must move, or we should be frozen
to death.

"Don't you know the way home?" asked I.

"I thought I did when I set out, but I am doubtful now.  The snow blinds
me, and I am feared that in moving about just now, I have lost the right
gait homewards."

He had his shepherd's staff with him, and by dint of plunging it before
us at every step we took--clinging close to each other, we went on safely
enough, as far as not falling down any of the steep rocks, but it was
slow, dreary work.  My brother, I saw, was more guided by Lassie and the
way she took than anything else, trusting to her instinct.  It was too
dark to see far before us; but he called her back continually, and noted
from what quarter she returned, and shaped our slow steps accordingly.
But the tedious motion scarcely kept my very blood from freezing.  Every
bone, every fibre in my body seemed first to ache, and then to swell, and
then to turn numb with the intense cold.  My brother bore it better than
I, from having been more out upon the hills.  He did not speak, except to
call Lassie.  I strove to be brave, and not complain; but now I felt the
deadly fatal sleep stealing over me.

"I can go no farther," I said, in a drowsy tone.  I remember I suddenly
became dogged and resolved.  Sleep I would, were it only for five
minutes.  If death were to be the consequence, sleep I would.  Gregory
stood still.  I suppose, he recognized the peculiar phase of suffering to
which I had been brought by the cold.

"It is of no use," said he, as if to himself.  "We are no nearer home
than we were when we started, as far as I can tell.  Our only chance is
in Lassie.  Here! roll thee in my maud, lad, and lay thee down on this
sheltered side of this bit of rock.  Creep close under it, lad, and I'll
lie by thee, and strive to keep the warmth in us.  Stay! hast gotten
aught about thee they'll know at home?"

I felt him unkind thus to keep me from slumber, but on his repeating the
question, I pulled out my pocket-handkerchief, of some showy pattern,
which Aunt Fanny had hemmed for me--Gregory took it, and tied it round
Lassie's neck.

"Hie thee, Lassie, hie thee home!"  And the white-faced ill-favoured
brute was off like a shot in the darkness.  Now I might lie down--now I
might sleep.  In my drowsy stupor I felt that I was being tenderly
covered up by my brother; but what with I neither knew nor cared--I was
too dull, too selfish, too numb to think and reason, or I might have
known that in that bleak bare place there was nought to wrap me in, save
what was taken off another.  I was glad enough when he ceased his cares
and lay down by me.  I took his hand.

"Thou canst not remember, lad, how we lay together thus by our dying
mother.  She put thy small, wee hand in mine--I reckon she sees us now;
and belike we shall soon be with her.  Anyhow, God's will be done."

"Dear Gregory," I muttered, and crept nearer to him for warmth.  He was
talking still, and again about our mother, when I fell asleep.  In an
instant--or so it seemed--there were many voices about me--many faces
hovering round me--the sweet luxury of warmth was stealing into every
part of me.  I was in my own little bed at home.  I am thankful to say,
my first word was "Gregory?"

A look passed from one to another--my father's stern old face strove in
vain to keep its sternness; his mouth quivered, his eyes filled slowly
with unwonted tears.

"I would have given him half my land--I would have blessed him as my
son,--oh God!  I would have knelt at his feet, and asked him to forgive
my hardness of heart."

I heard no more.  A whirl came through my brain, catching me back to
death.

I came slowly to my consciousness, weeks afterwards.  My father's hair
was white when I recovered, and his hands shook as he looked into my
face.

We spoke no more of Gregory.  We could not speak of him; but he was
strangely in our thoughts.  Lassie came and went with never a word of
blame; nay, my father would try to stroke her, but she shrank away; and
he, as if reproved by the poor dumb beast, would sigh, and be silent and
abstracted for a time.

Aunt Fanny--always a talker--told me all.  How, on that fatal night, my
father,--irritated by my prolonged absence, and probably more anxious
than he cared to show, had been fierce and imperious, even beyond his
wont, to Gregory; had upbraided him with his father's poverty, his own
stupidity which made his services good for nothing--for so, in spite of
the old shepherd, my father always chose to consider them.  At last,
Gregory had risen up, and whistled Lassie out with him--poor Lassie,
crouching underneath his chair for fear of a kick or a blow.  Some time
before, there had been some talk between my father and my aunt respecting
my return; and when aunt Fanny told me all this, she said she fancied
that Gregory might have noticed the coming storm, and gone out silently
to meet me.  Three hours afterwards, when all were running about in wild
alarm, not knowing whither to go in search of me--not even missing
Gregory, or heeding his absence, poor fellow--poor, poor fellow!--Lassie
came home, with my handkerchief tied round her neck.  They knew and
understood, and the whole strength of the farm was turned out to follow
her, with wraps, and blankets, and brandy, and every thing that could be
thought of.  I lay in chilly sleep, but still alive, beneath the rock
that Lassie guided them to.  I was covered over with my brother's plaid,
and his thick shepherd's coat was carefully wrapped round my feet.  He
was in his shirt-sleeves--his arm thrown over me--a quiet smile (he had
hardly ever smiled in life) upon his still, cold face.

My father's last words were, "God forgive me my hardness of heart towards
the fatherless child!"

And what marked the depth of his feeling of repentance, perhaps more than
all, considering the passionate love he bore my mother, was this: we
found a paper of directions after his death, in which he desired that he
might lie at the foot of the grave, in which, by his desire, poor Gregory
had been laid with OUR MOTHER.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HALF-BROTHERS***


******* This file should be named 2532.txt or 2532.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/3/2532



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

