The Project Gutenberg EBook of "Surly Tim", by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: "Surly Tim"
       A Lancashire Story

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Release Date: November 4, 2007 [EBook #23324]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "SURLY TIM" ***




Produced by David Widger






"SURLY TIM."

A LANCASHIRE STORY.

By Frances Hodgson Burnett

Copyright, 1877


"Sorry to hear my fellow-workmen speak so disparagin' o' me? Well,
Mester, that's as it may be yo' know. Happen my fellow-workmen ha' made
a bit o' a mistake--happen what seems loike crustiness to them beant so
much crustiness as summat else--happen I mought do my bit o' complainin'
too. Yo' munnot trust aw yo' hear, Mester; that's aw I can say."

I looked at the man's bent face quite curiously, and, judging from its
rather heavy but still not unprepossessing outline, I could not really
call it a bad face, or even a sulky one. And yet both managers and
hands had given me a bad account of Tim Hibblethwaite. "Surly Tim," they
called him, and each had something to say about his sullen disposition
to silence, and his short answers. Not that he was accused of anything
like misdemeanor, but he was "glum loike," the factory people said, and
"a surly fellow well deserving his name," as the master of his room had
told me.

I had come to Lancashire to take the control of my father's
spinning-factory a short time before, being anxious to do my best toward
the hands, and, I often talked to one and another in a friendly way, so
that I could the better understand their grievances and remedy them with
justice to all parties concerned. So in conversing with men, women, and
children, I gradually found out that Tim Hibblethwaite was in bad odor,
and that he held himself doggedly aloof from all; and this was how, in
the course of time, I came to speak to him about the matter, and the
opening words of my story are the words of his answer. But they did not
satisfy me by any means. I wanted to do the man justice myself, and see
that justice was done to him by others; and then again when, after my
curious look at him, he lifted his head from his work and drew the back
of his hand across his warm face, I noticed that he gave his eyes a
brush, and, glancing at him once more, I recognized the presence of a
moisture in them.

In my anxiety to conceal that I had noticed anything unusual, I am
afraid I spoke to him quite hurriedly. I was a young man then, and by no
means as self-possessed as I ought to have been.

"I hope you won't misunderstand me, Hibblethwaite,"

I said; "I don't mean to complain--indeed, I have nothing to complain
of, for Foxley tells me you are the steadiest and most orderly hand he
has under him; but the fact is, I should like to make friends with you
all, and see that no one is treated badly. And somehow or other I found
out that you were not disposed to feel friendly towards the rest, and I
was sorry for it. But I suppose you have some reason of your own."

The man bent down over his work again, silent for a minute, to my
discomfiture, but at last he spoke, almost huskily.

"Thank yo', Mester," he said; "yo're a koindly chap or yo' wouldn't ha'
noticed. An' yo're not fur wrong either. I ha' reasons o' my own, tho'
I'm loike to keep 'em to mysen most o' toimes. Th' fellows as throws
their slurs on me would na understond 'em if I were loike to gab, which
I never were. But happen th' toime 'll come when Surly Tim 'll tell his
own tale, though I often think its loike it wunnot come till th' Day o'
Judgment."

"I hope it will come before then," I said, cheerfully. "I hope the time
is not far away when we shall all understand you, Hibblethwaite. I think
it has been misunderstanding so far which has separated you from the
rest, and it cannot last always, you know."

But he shook his head--not after a surly fashion, but, as I thought, a
trifle sadly or heavily--so I did not ask any more questions, or try to
force the subject upon him.

But I noticed him pretty closely as time went on, and the more I saw of
him the more fully I was convinced that he was not so surly as people
imagined. He never interfered with the most active of his enemies,
nor made any reply when they taunted him, and more than once I saw
him perform a silent, half-secret act of kindness. Once I caught him
throwing half his dinner to a wretched little lad who had just come to
the factory, and worked near him; and once again, as I was leaving the
building on a rainy night, I came upon him on the stone steps at the
door bending down with an almost pathetic clumsiness to pin the woolen
shawl of a poor little mite, who, like so many others, worked with her
shiftless father and mother to add to their weekly earnings. It was
always the poorest and least cared for of the children whom he seemed to
befriend, and very often I noticed that even when he was kindest, in
his awkward man fashion, the little waifs were afraid of him, and showed
their fear plainly.

The factory was situated on the outskirts of a thriving country town
near Manchester, and at the end of the lane that led from it to the more
thickly populated part there was a path crossing a field to the pretty
church and church-yard, and this path was a short cut homeward for me.
Being so pretty and quiet the place had a sort of attraction for me; and
I was in the habit of frequently passing through it on my way, partly
because it was pretty and quiet, perhaps, and partly, I have no doubt,
because I was inclined to be weak and melancholy at the time, my health
being broken down under hard study.

It so happened that in passing here one night, and glancing in among the
graves and marble monuments as usual, I caught sight of a dark figure
sitting upon a little mound under a tree and resting its head upon its
hands, and in this sad-looking figure I recognized the muscular outline
of my friend Surly Tim.

He did not see me at first, and I was almost inclined to think it best
to leave him alone; but as I half turned away he stirred with something
like a faint moan, and then lifted his head and saw me standing in the
bright, clear moonlight.

"Who's theer?" he said. "Dost ta want owt?"

"It is only Doncaster, Hibblethwaite," I returned, as I sprang over the
low stone wall to join him. "What is the matter, old fellow? I thought I
heard you groan just now."

"Yo' mought ha' done, Mester," he answered heavily. "Happen tha did. I
dunnot know mysen. Nowts th' matter though, as I knows on, on'y I'm a
bit out o' soarts."

He turned his head aside slightly and began to pull at the blades of
grass on the mound, and all at once I saw that his hand was trembling
nervously.

It was almost three minutes before he spoke again.

"That un belongs to me," he said suddenly at last, pointing to a
longer mound at his feet. "An' this little un," signifying with an
indescribable gesture the small one upon which he sat.

"Poor fellow," I said, "I see now."

"A little lad o' mine," he said, slowly and tremulously. "A little lad
o' mine an'--an' his mother.'

"What!" I exclaimed, "I never knew that you were a married man, Tim."

He dropped his head upon his hand again, still pulling nervously at the
grass with the other.

"Th' law says I beant, Mester," he answered in a painful, strained
fashion. "I conna tell mysen what God-a'-moighty 'ud say about it."

"I don't understand," I faltered; "you don't mean to say the poor girl
never was your wife, Hibblethwaite."

"That's what th' law says," slowly; "I thowt different mysen, an' so did
th' poor lass. That's what's the matter, Mester; that's th' trouble."

The other nervous hand went up to his bent face for a minute and hid it,
but I did not speak. There was so much of strange grief in his simple
movement that I felt words would be out of place. It was not my dogged,
inexplicable "hand" who was sitting before me in the bright moonlight
on the baby's grave; it was a man with a hidden history of some tragic
sorrow long kept secret in his homely breast,--perhaps a history very
few of us could read aright. I would not question him, though I fancied
he meant to explain himself. I knew that if he was willing to tell me
the truth it was best that he should choose his own time for it, and so
I let him alone.

And before I had waited very long he broke the silence himself, as I had
thought he would.

"It wur welly about six year ago I comn here," he said, "more or less,
welly about six year. I wur a quiet chap then, Mester, an' had na many
friends, but I had more than I ha' now. Happen I wur better nater'd, but
just as loike I wur loigh-ter-hearted--but that's nowt to do wi' it.

"I had na been here more than a week when theer comes a young woman to
moind a loom i' th' next room to me, an' this young woman bein'
pretty an' modest takes my fancy. She wur na loike th' rest o' the
wenches--loud talkin' an' slattern i' her ways; she wur just quiet loike
and nowt else. First time I seed her I says to mysen, 'Theer's a lass
'at's seed trouble;' an' somehow every toime I seed her afterward
I says to mysen, 'Theer's a lass 'at's seed trouble.' It wur i'
her eye--she had a soft loike brown eye, Mester--an' it wur i' her
voice--her voice wur soft loike, too--I sometimes thowt it wur plain to
be seed even i' her dress. If she'd been born a lady she'd ha' been one
o' th' foine soart, an' as she'd been born a factory-lass she wur one
o' th' foine soart still. So I took to watchin' her an' tryin' to mak'
friends wi her, but I never had much luck wi' her till one neet I was
goin' home through th' snow, and I seed her afore tighten' th' drift wi'
nowt but a thin shawl over her head; so I goes up behind her an' I says
to her, steady and respecful, so as she wouldna be feart, I says:--

"'Lass, let me see thee home. It's bad weather fur thee to be out in by
thysen. Tak' my coat an' wrop thee up in it, an' tak' hold o' my arm an'
let me help thee along.'

"She looks up right straightforrad i' my face wi' her brown eyes, an' I
tell yo' Mester, I wur glad I wur a honest man 'stead o' a rascal, fur
them quiet eyes 'ud ha' fun me out afore I'd ha' done sayin' my say if
I'd meant harm.

"'Thank yo' kindly Mester Hibblethwaite,' she says, 'but dunnot tak' off
tha' coat fur me; I'm doin' pretty nicely. It is Mester Hibblethwaite,
beant it?'

"'Aye, lass,' I answers, 'it's him. Mought I ax yo're name.'

"'Aye, to be sure,' said she. 'My name's Rosanna--'Sanna Brent th' folk
at th' mill alius ca's me. I work at th' loom i' th' next room to thine.
I've seed thee often an' often.'

"So we walks home to her lodgins, an' on the way we talks together
friendly an' quiet loike, an th' more we talks th' more I sees she's
had trouble an' by an' by--bein' on'y common workin' folk, we're
straightforrad to each other in our plain way--it comes out what her
trouble has been.

"'Yo' p'raps wouldn't think I've been a married woman, Mester,' she
says; 'but I ha', an' I wedded an' rued. I married a sojer when I wur a
giddy young wench, four years ago, an' it wur th' worst thing as ever I
did i' aw my days. He wur one o' yo're handsome, fastish chaps, an' he
tired o' me as men o' his stripe alius do tire o' poor lasses, an' then
he ill-treated me. He went to th' Crimea after we'n been wed a year,
an' left me to shift fur mysen. An' I heard six month after he wur dead.
He'd never writ back to me nor sent me no help, but I couldna think he
wur dead till th' letter comn. He wur killed th' first month he wur out
fightin' th' Rooshians. Poor fellow! Poor Phil! Th' Lord ha' mercy on
him!'

"That wur how I found out about her trouble, an' somehow it seemed to
draw me to her, an' mak' me feel kindly to'ards her; 'twur so pitiful to
hear her talk about th' rascal, so sorrowful an' gentle, an' not gi' him
a real hard word for a' he'd done. But that's alius th' way wi' women
folk--th' more yo' harry's them, th' more they'll pity yo' an' pray for
yo'. Why she wurna more than twenty-two then, an' she must ha' been nowt
but a slip o' a lass when they wur wed.

"Hows'ever, Rosanna Brent an' me got to be good friends, an' we walked
home together o' nights, an talked about our bits o' wage, an' our bits
o' debt, an' th' way that wench 'ud keep me up i' spirits when I wur
a bit down-hearted about owt, wur just a wonder. She wur so quiet an'
steady, an' when she said owt she meant it, an' she never said too much
or too little. Her brown eyes alius minded me o' my mother, though th'
old woman deed when I were nobbut a little chap, but I never seed 'Sanna
Brent smile th'out thinkin' o' how my mother looked when I wur kneelin'
down sayin' my prayers after her. An' bein' as th' lass wur so dear to
me, I made up my mind to ax her to be summat dearer. So once goin' home
along wi' her, I takes hold o' her hand an' lifts it up an' kisses it
gentle--as gentle an' wi' summat th' same feelin' as I'd kiss th' Good
Book.

"''Sanna,' I says, 'bein' as yo've had so much trouble wi' yo're first
chance, would yo' be afeard to try a second? Could yo' trust a mon
again? Such a mon as me, 'Sanna?'

"'I wouldna be feart to trust thee, Tim,' she answers back soft an'
gentle after a manner. 'I wouldna be feart to trust thee any time.'

"I kisses her hand again, gentler still.

"'God bless thee, lass,' I says. 'Does that mean yes?'

"She crept up closer to me i' her sweet, quiet way.

"'Aye, lad,' she answers. 'It means yes, an' I'll bide by it.'

"'An' tha shalt never rue it, lass,' said I 'Tha's gi'en thy life to me,
an' I'll gi' mine to thee, sure and true.'

"So we wur axed i' th' church th' next Sunday, an' a month fro then we
wur wed, an' if ever God's sun shone on a happy mon, it shone on one
that day, when we come out o' church together--me and Rosanna--an'
went to our bit o' a home to begin life again. I coujdna tell thee,
Mester--theer beant no words to tell how happy an' peaceful we lived fur
two year after that. My lass never altered her sweet ways, an' I
just loved her to make up to her fur what had gone by. I thanked
God-a'-moighty fur his blessing every day, and every day I prayed to
be made worthy of it. An' here's just wheer I'd like to ax a question,
Mester, about sum m at 'ats worretted me a good deal. I dunnot want to
question th' Maker, but I would loike to know how it is 'at sometime
it seems 'at we're clean forgot--as if He couldna fash hissen about
our troubles, an' most loike left 'em to work out their-sens. Yo' see,
Mester, an' we aw see sometime He thinks on us an' gi's us a lift,
but hasna tha thysen seen times when tha stopt short an' axed thysen,
'Wheer's God-a'-moighty 'at he isna straighten things out a bit? Th'
world's i' a power o' a snarl. Th' righteous is forsaken, 'n his seed's
beggin' bread. An' th' devil's topmost agen.' I've talked to my lass
about it sometimes, an' I dunnot think I meant harm, Mester, for I felt
humble enough--an' when I talked, my lass she'd listen an' smile soft
an' sorrowful, but she never gi' me but one answer.

"'Tim,' she'd say, 'this is on'y th' skoo' an we're th' scholars, an'
He's teachin' us his way. We munnot be loike th' children o' Israel i'
th' Wilderness, an' turn away fro' th' cross 'cause o' th' Sarpent. We
munnot say, "Theer's a snake:" we mun say, "Theer's th' Cross, an' th'
Lord gi' it to us." Th' teacher wouldna be o' much use, Tim, if th'
scholars knew as much as he did, an' I allus think it's th' best to
comfort mysen wi' sayin', "Th' Lord-a'-moighty, He knows."'

"An' she alius comforted me too when I wur worretted. Life looked smooth
somewhow them three year. Happen th' Lord sent 'em to me to make up fur
what wur comin'.

"At th' eend o' th' first year th' child wur born, th' little lad here,"
touching the turf with his hand, "'Wee Wattie' his mother ca'd him,
an' he wur a fine, lightsome little chap. He filled th' whole house wi'
music day in an' day out, crowin' an' crowin'--an' cryin' too sometime.
But if ever yo're a feyther, Mester, yo'll find out 'at a baby's cry's
music often enough, an' yo'll find, too, if yo' ever lose one, 'at yo'd
give all yo'd getten just to hear even th' worst o' cryin'. Rosanna she
couldna find i' her heart to set th' little un out o' her arms a minnit,
an' she'd go about th' room wi' her eyes aw leeted up, an' her face
bloomin' like a slip o' a girl's, an' if she laid him i' th' cradle
her head 'ud be turnt o'er har shoulder aw th' time lookin' at him an'
singin' bits o' sweet-soundin' foolish woman-folks' songs. I thowt then
'at them old nursery songs wur th' happiest music I ever heard, an' when
'Sanna sung 'em they minded me o' hymn-tunes.

"Well, Mester, before th' spring wur out Wee Wat was toddlin' round
holdin' to his mother's gown, an' by th' middle o' th' next he was
cooin' like a dove, an' prattlin' words i' a voice like hers. His eyes
wur big an' brown an' straightforrad like hers, an' his mouth was like
hers, an' his curls wur the color o' a brown bee's back. Happen we set
too much store by him, or happen it wur on'y th' Teacher again teachin'
us his way, but hows'ever that wur, I came home one sunny mornin' fro'
th' factory, an' my dear lass met me at th' door, all white an' cold,
but tryin' hard to be brave an' help me to bear what she had to tell.

"'Tim,' said she, 'th' Lord ha' sent us a trouble; but we can bear it
together, conna we, dear lad?'

"That wur aw, but I knew what it meant, though th' poor little lamb had
been well enough when I kissed him last.

"I went in an' saw him lyin' theer on his pillows strugglin' an' gaspin'
in hard convulsions, an' I seed aw was over. An' in half an hour, just
as th' sun crept across th' room an' touched his curls th' pretty little
chap opens his eyes aw at once.

"'Daddy!' he crows out. 'Sithee Dad--! an' he lift' hissen up, catches
at th' floatin' sun shine, laughs at it, and fa's back--dead, Mester.

"I've allus thowt 'at th' Lord-a'-moighty knew what He wur doin' when he
gi' th' woman t' Adam i' th' Garden o' Eden. He knowed he wur nowt but
a poor chap as couldna do fur hissen; an' I suppose that's th' reason he
gi' th' woman th' strength to bear trouble when it comn. I'd ha' gi'en
clean in if it hadna been fur my lass when th' little chap deed. I never
tackledt owt i' aw my days 'at hurt me as heavy as losin' him did. I
couldna abear th' sight o' his cradle, an' if ever I comn across any o'
his bits o' playthings, I'd fa' to cryin' an' shakin' like a babby. I
kept out o' th' way o' th' neebors' children even. I wasna like Rosanna.
I couldna see quoite clear what th' Lord meant, an' I couldna help
murmuring sad and heavy. That's just loike us men, Mester; just as if
th' dear wench as had give him her life fur food day an' neet, hadna fur
th' best reet o' th' two to be weak an' heavy-hearted.

"But I getten welly over it at last, an' we was beginnin' to come round
a bit an' look forrard to th' toime we'd see him agen 'stead o' luokin'
back to th' toime we shut th' round bit of a face under th' coffin-lid.
Th' day comn when we could bear to talk about him an' moind things he'd
said an' tried to say i' his broken babby way. An' so we wur creepin'
back again to th' old happy quiet, an' we had been for welly six month,
when summat fresh come. I'll never forget it, Mester, th' neet it
happened. I'd kissed Rosanna at th' door an' left her standin' theer
when I went up to th' village to buy summat she wanted. It wur a bright
moon light neet, just such a neet as this, an' th' lass had followed me
out to see th' moonshine, it wur so bright an' clear; an' just before
I starts she folds both her hands on my shoulder an' says, soft an'
thoughtful:--

"'Tim, I wonder if th' little chap sees us?'

"'I'd loike to know, dear lass,' I answers back. An' then she speaks
again:--

"'Tim, I wonder if he'd know he was ours if he could see, or if he'd ha'
forgot? He wur such a little fellow.'

"Them wur th' last peaceful words I ever heerd her speak. I went up to
th' village an' getten what she sent me fur, an' then I comn back. Th'
moon wur shinin' as bright as ever, an' th' flowers i' her slip o' a
garden wur aw sparklin' wi' dew. I seed 'em as I went up th' walk, an' I
thowt again of what she'd said bout th' little lad.

"She wasna outside, an' I couldna see a leet about th' house, but I
heerd voices, so I walked straight in--into th' entry an' into th'
kitchen, an' theer she wur, Mester--my poor wench, crouchin' down by th'
table, hidin' her face i' her hands, an' close beside her wur a mon--a
mon i' red sojer clothes.

"My heart leaped into my throat, an' fur a min nit I hadna a word, fur
I saw summat wui up, though I couldna tell what it wur. But at last my
voice come back.

"'Good evenin', Mester,' I says to him; 'I hope yo' ha'not broughten
ill-news? What ails thee, dear lass?'

"She stirs a little, an' gives a moan like a dyin' child; and then she
lifts up her wan, brokenhearted face, an' stretches out both her hands
to me.

"'Tim,' she says, 'dunnot hate me, lad, dunnot. I thowt he wur dead long
sin'. I thowt 'at th' Rooshans killed him an' I wur free, but I amna. I
never wur. He never deed, Tim, an' theer he is--the mon as I wur wed to
an' left by. God forgi' him, an' oh, God forgi' me!'

"Theer, Mester, theer's a story fur thee. What dost ta' think o't?
My poor lass wasna my wife at aw--th' little chap's mother wasna his
feyther's wife, an' never had been. That theer worthless fellow as beat
an' starved her an' left her to fight th' world alone, had comn back
alive an' well, ready to begin agen. He could tak' her away fro' me any
hour i' th' day, and I couldna say a word to bar him. Th' law said my
wife--th' little dead lad's mother--belonged to him, body an' soul.
Theer was no law to help us--it wur aw on his side.

"Theer's no use o' goin' o'er aw we said to each other i' that dark
room theer. I raved an' prayed an' pled wi' th' lass to let me carry her
across th' seas, wheer I'd heerd tell theer was help fur such loike; but
she pled back i' her broken, patient way that it wouldna be reet, an'
happen it wur the Lord's will. She didna say much to th' sojer. I scarce
heerd her speak to him more than once, when she axed him to let her go
away by hersen.

"'Tha conna want me now, Phil,' she said. 'Tha conna care fur me. Tha
must know I'm more this mon's wife than thine. But I dunnot ax thee to
gi' me to him because I know that wouldna be reet; I on'y ax thee to let
me aloan. I'll go fur enough off an' never see him more.'

"But th' villain held to her. If she didna come wi' him, he said, he'd
ha' her up before th' court fur bigamy. I could ha' done murder then,
Mester, an' I would ha' done if it hadna been for th' poor lass runnin'
in betwixt us an' pleadin' wi' aw her might. If we'n been rich foak
theer might ha' been some help fur her, at least; th' law might ha' been
browt to mak' him leave her be, but bein' poor workin' foak theer wur
on'y one thing: th' wife mun go wi' th' husband, an' theer th' husband
stood--a scoundrel, cursin', wi' his black heart on his tongue.

"'Well,' says th' lass at last, fair wearied out wi' grief, 'I'll go wi'
thee, Phil, an' I'll do my best to please thee, but I wunnot promise to
forget th' mon as has been true to me, an' has stood betwixt me an' th'
world.'

"Then she turned round to me.

"'Tim,' she said to me, as if she wur haaf feart--aye, feart o' him, an'
me standin' by. Three hours afore, th' law ud ha' let me mill any mon
'at feart her. 'Tim,' she says, 'surely he wunnot refuse to let us go
together to th' little lad's grave--fur th' last time.' She didna speak
to him but ti me, an' she spoke still an' strained as if she wui too
heart-broke to be wild. Her face was as white as th' dead, but she didna
cry, as ony other woman would ha' done. 'Come, Tim,' she said, 'he conna
say no to that.'

"An' so out we went 'thout another word, an' left th' black-hearted
rascal behind, sittin' i' th' very room th' little un deed in. His
cradle stood theer i' th' corner. We went out into th' moonlight 'thout
speakin', an' we didna say a word until we come to this very place,
Mester.

"We stood here for a minute silent, an' then I sees her begin to shake,
an' she throws hersen down on th' grass wi' her arms flung o'er th'
grave, an' she cries out as if her death-wound had been give to her.

"'Little lad,' she says, 'little lad, dost ta see thy mother? Canst
na tha hear her callin' thee? Little lad, get nigh to th' Throne an'
plead!'

"I fell down beside o' th' poor crushed wench an' sobbed wi' her. I
couldna comfort her, for wheer wur there any comfort for us? Theer wur
none left--theer wur no hope. We was shamed an' broke down--our lives
was lost. Th' past wur nowt--th' future wur worse. Oh, my poor lass, how
hard she tried to pray--fur me, Mester--yes, fur me, as she lay theer
wi' her arms round her dead babby's grave, an' her cheek on th' grass as
grew o'er his breast. 'Lord God-a'-moighty, she says, 'help us--dunnot
gi' us up--dunnot, dunnot. We conna do 'thowt thee now, if th' time ever
wur when we could. Th' little chap mun be wi' thee, I moind th' bit o'
comfort about getherin' th' lambs i' his bosom. An', Lord, if tha could
spare him a minnit, send him down to us wi' a bit o' leet. Oh, Feyther!
help th' poor lad here--help him. Let th' weight fa' on me, not on him.
Just help th' poor lad to bear it. If ever I did owt as wur worthy i'
thy sight, let that be my reward. Dear Lord-a'-moighty, I'd be willin'
to gi' up a bit o' my own heavenly glory fur th' dear lad's sake.'

"Well, Mester, she lay theer on th' grass pray in' an crying wild but
gentle, fur nigh haaf an hour, an' then it seemed 'at she got quoite
loike, an' she got up. Happen th' Lord had hearkened an' sent th'
child--happen He had, fur when she getten up her face looked to me aw
white an' shinin' i' th' clear moonlight.

"'Sit down by me, dear lad,' she said, 'an' hold my hand a minnit.' I
set down an' took hold of her hand, as she bid me.

"'Tim,' she said, 'this wur why th' little chap deed. Dost na tha see
now 'at th' Lord knew best?'

"'Yes, lass,' I answers humble, an' lays my face on her hand, breakin'
down again.

"'Hush, dear lad,' she whispers, 'we hannot time fur that. I want to
talk to thee. Wilta listen?'

"'Yes, wife,' I says, an' I heerd her sob when I said it, but she
catches hersen up again.

"'I want thee to mak' me a promise,' said she. 'I want thee to promise
never to forget what peace we ha' had. I want thee to remember it allus,
an' to moind him 'at's dead, an' let his little hond howd thee back fro'
sin an' hard thowts. I'll pray fur thee neet an' day, Tim, an' tha shalt
pray fur me, an' happen theer'll come a leet. But if theer dunnot, dear
lad--an' I dunnot see how theer could--if theer dunnot, an' we never see
each other agen, I want thee to mak' me a promise that if tha sees th'
little chap first tha'lt moind him o' me, and watch out wi' him nigh th'
gate, and I'll promise thee that if I see him first, I'll moind him o'
thee an' watch out true an' constant.'

"I promised her, Mester, as yo' can guess, an' we kneeled down an'
kissed th' grass, an' she took a bit o' th' sod to put i' her bosom. An'
then we stood up an' looked at each other, an' at last she put her dear
face on my breast an' kissed me, as she had done every neet sin' we were
mon an' wife.

"'Good-bye, dear lad,' she whispers--her voice aw broken. 'Doant come
back to th' house till I'm gone. Good-bye, dear, dear, lad, an' God
bless thee.' An' she slipped out o' my arms an' wur gone in a moment
awmost before I could cry out.

"Theer isna much more to tell, Mester--th' eend's comin' now, an' happen
it'll shorten off th' story, so 'at it seems suddent to thee. But it
were-na suddent to me. I lived alone here, an' worked, an' moinded my
own business, an' answered no questions fur nigh about a year, hearin'
nowt, an' seein' nowt, an' hopin' nowt, till one toime when th' daisies
were blowin' on th' little grave here, theer come to me a letter fro'
Manchester fro' one o' th' medical chaps i' th' hospital. It wur a short
letter wi' prent on it, an' the moment I seed it I knowed summat wur up,
an' I opened it tremblin'. Mester, theer wur a woman lyin' i' one o' th'
wards dyin' o' some long-named heart-disease, an' she'd prayed 'em to
send fur me, an' one o' th' young softhearted ones had writ me a line to
let me know.

"I started aw'most afore I'd finished readin' th' letter, an' when I
getten to th' place I fun just what I knowed I should. I fun her--my
wife--th' blessed lass, an' 'f I'd been an hour later I would-na ha'
seen her alive, fur she were nigh past knowin' me then.

"But I knelt down by th' bedside an' I plead wi' her as she lay theer,
until I browt her back to th world again fur one moment. Her eyes flew
wide open aw at onct, an' she seed me an' smiled, aw her dear face
quiverin' i' death.

"'Dear lad,' she whispered, 'th' path was na so long after aw. Th' Lord
knew--He trod it hissen' onct, yo' know. I knowed tha'd come--I prayed
so. I've reached th' very eend now, Tim, an' I shall see th' little lad
first. But I wunnot forget my promise--no. I'll look out--fur thee--fur
thee--at th' gate.'

"An' her eyes shut slow an' quiet, an' I knowed she was dead.

"Theer, Mester Doncaster, theer it aw is, fur theer she lies under th'
daisies cloost by her child, fur I browt her here an' buried her. Th'
fellow as come betwixt us had tortured her fur a while an' then left her
again, I fun out--an' she wur so afeard of doin' me some harm that she
wouldna come nigh me. It wur heart disease as killed her, th' medical
chaps said, but I knowed better--it wur heart-break. That's aw.
Sometimes I think o'er it till I conna stand it any longer, an' I'm fain
to come here an' lay my hand on th' grass,--an' sometimes I ha' queer
dreams about her. I had one last neet. I thowt 'at she comn to me aw at
onct just as she used to look, on'y, wi' her white face shinin' loike
a star, an' she says, 'Tim, th' path isna so long after aw--tha's come
nigh to th' eend, an' me an' th' little chap is waitin'. He knows thee,
dear lad, fur I've towt him.'

"That's why I comn here to-neet, Mester; an' I believe that's why I've
talked so free to thee. If I'm near th' eend I'd loike some one to know,
I ha' meant no hurt when I seemed grum an' surly, It wurna ill-will, but
a heavy heart."

He stopped here, and his head drooped upon his hands again, and for a
minute or so there was another dead silence. Such a story as this needed
no comment. I could make none. It seemed to me that the poor fellow's
sore heart could bear none. At length he rose from the turf and stood
up, looking out over the graves into the soft light beyond with a
strange, wistful sadness.

"Well, I mun go now," he said slowly. "Good-neet, Mester, good-neet, an'
thank yo' fur listenin'."

"Good night," I returned, adding, in an impulse of pity that was almost
a passion, "and God help you!"

"Thank yo' again, Mester!" he said, and then turned away; and as I sat
pondering I watched his heavy drooping figure threading its way among
the dark mounds and white marble, and under the shadowy trees, and out
into the path beyond. I did not sleep well that night. The strained,
heavy tones of the man's voice were in my ears, and the homely yet
tragic story seemed to weave itself into all my thoughts, and keep me
from rest. I could not get it out of my mind.

In consequence of this sleeplessness I was later than usual in going
down to the factory, and when I arrived at the gates I found an
unusual bustle there. Something out of the ordinary routine had plainly
occurred, for the whole place was in confusion. There was a crowd of
hands grouped about one corner of the yard, and as I came in a man ran
against me, and showed me a terribly pale face.

"I ax pardon, Mester Doncaster," he said in a wild hurry, "but theer's
an accident happened. One o' th' weavers is hurt bad, an' I'm goin' fur
th' doctor. Th' loom caught an' crushed him afore we could stop it."

For some reason or other my heart misgave me that very moment. I pushed
forward to the group in the yard corner, and made my way through it.

A man was lying on a pile of coats in the middle of the by-standers,--a
poor fellow crushed and torn and bruised, but lying quite quiet now,
only for an occasional little moan, that was scarcely more than a quick
gasp for breath. It was Surly Tim!

"He's nigh th' eend o' it now!" said one of the hands pityingly. "He's
nigh th' last now, poor chap! What's that he's savin', lads?"

For all at once some flickering sense seemed to have caught at one of
the speaker's words, and the wounded man stirred, murmuring faintly--but
not to the watchers. Ah, no! to something far, far beyond their feeble
human sight--to something in the broad Without.

"Th' eend!" he said, "aye, this is th' eend, dear lass, an' th' path's
aw shinin' or summat an--Why, lass, I can see thee plain, an' th' little
chap too!"

Another flutter of the breath, one slight movement of the mangled hand,
and I bent down closer to the poor fellow--closer, because my eyes were
so dimmed that I could not see.

"Lads," I said aloud a few seconds later, "you can do no more for him.
His pain is over!"

For with a sudden glow of light which shone upon the shortened path and
the waiting figures of his child and its mother, Surly Tim's earthly
trouble had ended.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of "Surly Tim", by Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "SURLY TIM" ***

***** This file should be named 23324.txt or 23324.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/2/23324/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
