The Project Gutenberg EBook of Editha's Burglar, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Editha's Burglar
       A Story for Children

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Illustrator: Henry Sandham

Release Date: March 7, 2018 [EBook #56692]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDITHA'S BURGLAR ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






[Illustration: (_Original photograph of little Elsie Leslie._)
EDITHA.]




                            EDITHA'S BURGLAR
                          A STORY FOR CHILDREN


                                   BY
                        FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT

                            _ILLUSTRATED BY_
                             HENRY SANDHAM.

                                 BOSTON
                        JORDAN, MARSH & COMPANY
                                  1890

                            Copyright, 1888,
                         By JORDAN MARSH & CO.

                     [Illustration: Letter, page 1]

                     [Illustration: Letter, page 2]

                                                           March 25 1888

  Dear Mr Jordan Marsh & Co

  Mamma has left it for me to deside if I will let you have my picture
  for your book I think it wold be very nice. wont it seem funny to see
  my very own picture in Editha like the little girl that used to be in
  st Nickolas. I think mrs Burnet writs lovely storys I wrote her a
  letter and sent it away to paris and told her so and asked her if she
  wold hurry and write another story just as quick as she could I am
  looking for an anser everyday. I like to write letters but I like to
  get the ansers still better I am going to play Editha in boston for
  two weeks and I will ask my mamma to let me come to your store and see
  all of the butiful things I used to come every day when I was in
  boston last winter

                              your little frend
                                                            Elsie Leslie

                                                       72 West 92 Street
                                                                New York
                                                                    City

   (_Written by Elsie Leslie Lyde, the original Editha, eight years old._)

              [Illustration: Illustrated by _Hy Sandham_]




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                    PAGE
  Editha                                                  _Frontispiece_
  She spent most of her time in the library reading her papa's big
          books                                                       13
  Through the newspapers she found there were men who lived by
          breaking into people's houses                               17
  "Never mind about the burglars, Nixie"                              21
  "The burglars, Miss, that broke into number eighteen last night"    25
  "Kitty," he said, "I am obliged to go to Glasgow"                   29
  "Don't be frightened," she said, "I don't want to hurt you"         33
  He laughed so hard, that he doubled up                              37
  "It's curious that you should know just where to look for
          things," said Editha                                        41
  "To think o' me forgettin' my card-case," he said                   45
  Editha came slowly down the staircase with her treasures            49
  He threw his head very far back, which was vulgar                   53
  "To think of her risking her dear little life to save me!"          57
  The burglar brought from under his mattress a box, which he
          handed to the little girl                                   61




                           EDITHA'S BURGLAR.


                      By Frances Hodgson Burnett.

                 [Illustration: Illuminated capital I]

I will begin by saying that Editha was always rather a queer little
girl, and not much like other children. She was not a strong, healthy
little girl, and had never been able to run about and play; and, as she
had no sisters or brothers, or companions of her own size, she was
rather old-fashioned, as her aunts used to call it. She had always been
very fond of books, and had learned to read when she was such a tiny
child, that I should almost be afraid to say how tiny she was when she
read her first volume through. Her papa wrote books himself, and was
also the editor of a newspaper; and, as he had a large library, Editha
perhaps read more than was quite good for her. She lived in London; and,
as her mamma was very young and pretty, and went out a great deal, and
her papa was so busy, and her governess only came in the morning, she
was left to herself a good many hours in the day, and when she was left
to herself, she spent the greater part of her time in the library
reading her papa's big books, and even his newspapers.

She was very fond of the newspapers, because she found so many curious
things in them,--stories, for instance, of strange events which happened
every day in the great city of London, and yet never seemed to happen
anywhere near where she lived. Through the newspapers, she found that
there were actually men who lived by breaking into peoples' houses and
stealing all the nice things they could carry away, and she read that
such men were called burglars. When she first began to read about
burglars, she was very much troubled. In the first place, she felt
rather timid about going to bed at night, and, in the second place, she
felt rather sorry for the burglars.

"I suppose no one ever taught them any better," she thought.

[Illustration: She spent most of her time in the library reading her
papa's big books]

In fact, she thought so much about the matter, that she could not help
asking her papa some questions one morning when he was at breakfast. He
was reading his paper and eating his chops both at once when she spoke
to him.

"Papa," she said, in a solemn little voice, and looking at him in a very
solemn manner, "papa dear, what do you think of burglars--as a class?"
(She said "as a class," because she had heard one of her papa's friends
say it, and as he was a gentleman she admired very much, she liked to
talk as he did.) Her papa gave a little jump in his chair, as if she had
startled him, and then he pushed his hair off his forehead and stared at
her.

"Burglars! As a class!" he said, and then he stared at her a minute
again in rather a puzzled way. "Bless my soul!" he said. "As a class,
Nixie!" (that was his queer pet name for her.) "Nixie, where is your
mother?"

"She is in bed, papa dear, and we mustn't disturb her," said Editha.
"The party last night tired her out. I peeped into her room softly as I
came down. She looks so pretty when she is asleep. What _do_ you think
of burglars, papa?"

"I think they're a bad lot, Nixie," said her papa, "a bad lot."

"Are there no good burglars, papa?"

"Well, Nixie," answered papa, "I should say not. As a rule you know,--"
and here he began to smile, as people often smiled at Editha when she
asked questions--"As a rule burglars are not distinguished for moral
perspicuity and blameless character."

But Editha did not understand what moral perspicuity meant, and besides
she was thinking again.

"Miss Lane was talking to me the other day, about some poor children who
had never been taught anything; they had never had any French or music
lessons, and scarcely knew how to read, and she said they had never had
any advantages. Perhaps that is the way with the burglars,
papa,--perhaps they have never had any advantages,--perhaps if they had
had advantages they mightn't have been burglars."

"Lessons in French and music are very elevating to the mind, my dear
Nixie," papa began in his laughing way, which was always a trial to
Editha, but suddenly he stopped, and looked at her rather sadly.

"How old are you, Nixie?" he asked.

[Illustration: Through the newspapers she found there were men who lived
by breaking into people's houses.]

"I am seven," answered Editha, "seven years, going on eight."

Papa sighed.

"Come here, little one," he said, holding out his strong white hand to
her.

She left her chair and went to him, and he put his arms around her, and
kissed her, and stroked her long brown hair.

"Don't puzzle your little brain too much," he said, "never mind about
the burglars, Nixie."

"Well," said Editha, "I can't help thinking about them a little, and it
seems to me that there must be, perhaps, one good burglar among all the
bad ones, and I can't help being rather sorry, even for the bad ones.
You see, they must have to be up all night, and out in the rain
sometimes, and they can't help not having had advantages."

It was strange that the first thing she heard, when she went up to her
mamma's room, was something about burglars.

She was very, very fond of her mamma, and very proud of her. She even
tried to take care of her in her small way; she never disturbed her when
she was asleep, and she always helped her to dress, bringing her things
to her, buttoning her little shoes and gloves, putting the perfume on
her handkerchiefs, and holding her wraps until she wanted them.

This morning, when she went into the dressing room, she found the
chamber-maid there before her, and her dear little mamma looking very
pale.

"Ah mem! if you please mem!" the chambermaid was saying, "what a
blessing it was they didn't come here!"

"Who, Janet?" Editha asked.

"The burglars, Miss, that broke into Number Eighteen last night, and
carried off all the silver, and the missus's jewelry."

"If burglars ever do break in here," said mamma, "I hope none of us will
hear them, though it would almost break my heart to have my things
taken. If I should waken in the night, and find a burglar in my room, I
think it would kill me, and I know I should scream, and then there is no
knowing what they might do. If ever you think there is a burglar in the
house, Nixie, whatever you do, don't scream or make any noise. It would
be better to have one's things stolen, than to be killed by burglars for
screaming."

[Illustration: "Never mind about the burglars, Nixie."]

She was not a very wise little mamma, and often said rather thoughtless
things; but she was very gentle and loving, and Editha was so fond of
her that she put her arms round her waist and said to her:

"Mamma, dearest, I will never let any burglars hurt you or frighten you
if I can help it. I do believe I could persuade them not to. I should
think even a burglar would listen to reason."

That made her mamma laugh, so that she forgot all about the burglars and
began to get her color again, and it was not long before she was quite
gay, and was singing a song she had heard at the opera, while Editha was
helping her to dress.

But that very night Editha met a burglar.

Just before dinner, her papa came up from the city in a great hurry. He
dashed up to the front door in a cab, and, jumping out, ran upstairs to
mamma, who was sitting in the drawing room, while Editha read aloud to
her.

"Kitty, my dear," he said, "I am obliged to go to Glasgow by the 'five'
train. I must throw a few things into a portmanteau and go at once."

"Oh, Francis!" said mamma. "And just after that burglary at the
Norris's! I don't like to be left alone."

"The servants are here," said papa, "and Nixie will take care of you;
wont you, Nixie? Nixie is interested in burglars."

"I am sure Nixie could do more than the servants," said mamma. "All
three of them sleep in one room at the top of the house when you are
away, and even if they awakened they would only scream."

"Nixie wouldn't scream," said papa, laughing; "Nixie would do something
heroic. I will leave you in her hands."

He was only joking, but Editha did not think of what he said as a joke;
she felt that her mamma was really left in her care, and that it was a
very serious matter.

She thought about it so seriously that she hardly talked at all at
dinner, and was so quiet afterward that her mamma said, "Dear me, Nixie,
what _are_ you thinking of? You look as solemn as a little owl."

"I am thinking of you, mamma," the child answered.

[Illustration: "The burglars, Miss, that broke into number eighteen last
night."]

And then her mamma laughed and kissed her, and said: "Well, I must say I
don't see why you should look so grave about me. I didn't think I was
such a solemn subject."

At last bed-time came, and the little girl went to her mother's room,
because she was to sleep there.

"I am glad I have you with me, Nixie," said mamma, with a rather nervous
little laugh. "I am sure I shouldn't like to sleep in this big room
alone."

But, after she was in bed, she soon fell asleep, and lay looking so
happy and sweet and comfortable that Editha thought it was lovely to see
her.

Editha did not go to sleep for a long time. She thought of her papa
trying to sleep on the train, rushing through the dark night on its way
to Scotland; she thought of a new book she had just begun to read; she
thought of a child she had once heard singing in the street; and when
her eyes closed at length, her mind had just gone back to the burglars
at Number Eighteen. She slept until midnight, and then something wakened
her. At first she did not know what it was, but in a few minutes she
found that it was a queer little sound coming from down-stairs,--a sound
like a stealthy filing of iron.

She understood in a moment then, because she had heard the chamber-maid
say that the burglars broke into Number Eighteen by filing through the
bars of the shutters.

"It is a burglar," she thought, "and he will awaken mamma."

If she had been older, and had known more of the habits of burglars, she
might have been more frightened than she was. She did not think of
herself at all, however, but of her mother.

She began to reason the matter over as quickly as possible, and she made
up her mind that the burglar must not be allowed to make a noise.

"I'll go down and ask him to please be as quiet as he can," she said to
herself, "and I'll tell him why."

Certainly, this was a queer thing to think of doing, but I told you when
I began my story that she was a queer little girl.

She slipped out of bed so quietly that she scarcely stirred the clothes,
and then slipped just as quietly out of the room and down the stairs.

The filing had ceased, but she heard a sound of stealthy feet in the
kitchen; and, though it must be confessed her heart beat rather faster
than usual, she made her way to the kitchen and opened the door.

[Illustration: "Kitty," he said, "I am obliged to go to Glasgow."]

Imagine the astonishment of that burglar when, on hearing the door open,
he turned round and found himself looking at a slender little girl, in a
white frilled night-gown, and with bare feet,--a little girl whose large
brown eyes rested on him in a by no means unfriendly way.

"I'll be polite to him," Editha had said, as she was coming down-stairs.
"I am sure he'll be more obliging if I am very polite. Miss Lane says
politeness always wins its way."

So the first words she spoke were as polite as she could make them.

"Don't be frightened," she said, in a soft voice. "I don't want to hurt
you; I came to ask a favor of you."

The burglar was so amazed that he actually forgot he was a burglar, and
staggered back against the wall. I think he thought at first that Editha
was a little ghost. "You see I couldn't hurt you if I wanted to," she
went on, wishing to encourage him. "I'm too little. I'm only seven,--and
a little over,--and I'm not going to scream, because that would waken
mamma, and that's just what I don't want to do."

That did encourage the burglar, but still he was so astonished that he
did not know what to do.

"Well, I'm blowed," he said in a whisper, "if this ain't a rummy go!"
which was extremely vulgar language; but, unfortunately, he was one of
those burglars who, as Miss Lane said, "had not had any advantages,"
which is indeed the case with the majority of the burglars of my
acquaintance.

Then he began to laugh,--in a whisper also, if one can be said to laugh
in a whisper. He put his hand over his mouth, and made no noise, but he
laughed so hard that he doubled up and rocked himself to and fro.

"The rummiest go!" he said, in his uneducated way. "An' she haint agoin'
to 'urt me. Oh, my heye!"

He was evidently very badly educated, indeed, for he not only used
singular words, but sounded his h's all in the wrong places. Editha
noticed this, even in the midst of her surprise at his laughter. She
could not understand what he was laughing at. Then it occurred to her
that she might have made a mistake.

"If you please," she said with great delicacy, "are you really a
burglar?"

[Illustration: "Don't be frightened," she said, "I don't want to hurt
you."]

He stopped laughing just long enough to answer her.

"Lor' no, miss," he said, "by no manner o' means. I'm a dear friend o'
yer Par's, come to make a evenin' call, an' not a wishin' to trouble the
servants, I stepped in through the winder."

"Ah!" said Editha, looking very gravely at him; "I see you are joking
with me, as papa does sometimes. But what I wanted to say to you was
this: Papa has gone to Scotland, and all our servants are women, and
mamma would be so frightened if you were to waken her, that I am sure it
would make her ill. And if you are going to burgle, would you please
burgle as quietly as you can, so that you wont disturb her?"

The burglar stopped laughing, and, staring at her, once more uttered his
vulgar exclamation:

"Well, I'll be blowed!"

"Why don't you say 'I'll be blown?'" asked Editha. "I'm sure it isn't
correct to say you'll be blowed."

She thought he was going off into one of his unaccountable fits of
laughter again, but he did not; he seemed to check himself with an
effort.

"There haint no time to waste," she heard him mutter.

"No, I suppose there isn't," she answered, "Mamma might wake and miss
me. What are you going to burgle first?"

"You'd better go upstairs to yer mar," he said, rather sulkily.

Editha thought deeply for a few seconds.

"You oughtn't to burgle anything," she said. "Of course you know that,
but if you have really made up your mind to do it, I would like to show
you the things you'd better take."

"What, fer instance?" said the burglar, with interest.

"You mustn't take any of mamma's things," said Editha, "because they are
all in her room, and you would waken her, and besides, she said it would
break her heart; and don't take any of the things papa is fond of. I'll
tell you what," turning rather pale, "you can take my things."

"What kind o' things?" asked the burglar.

[Illustration: He laughed so hard, that he doubled up.]

"My locket, and the little watch papa gave me, and the necklace and
bracelets my grandmamma left me,--they are worth a great deal of money,
and they are very pretty, and I was to wear them when I grew to be a
young lady, but--you can take them. And--then--" very slowly, and with a
deep sigh, "there are--my books. I'm very fond of them, but----"

"I don't want no books," said the burglar.

"Don't you?" exclaimed she, "Ah, thank you."

"Well," said the burglar, as if to himself, and staring hard at her
brightening face, "I never see no sich a start afore."

"Shall I go upstairs and get the other things?" said Editha.

"No," he said. "You stay where you are--or stay, come along o' me inter
the pantry, an' sit down while I'm occypied."

He led the way into the pantry, and pushed her down on a step, and then
began to open the drawers where the silver was kept.

"Its curious that you should know just where to look for things, and
that your key should fit, isn't it?" said Editha.

"Yes," he answered, "It's werry sing'lar, indeed. There's a good deal in
bein' eddicated."

"Are you educated?" asked Editha with a look of surprise.

"Did yer think I wasn't?" said the burglar.

"Well," said Editha, not wishing to offend him, "you see, you pronounce
your words so very strangely."

"It's all a matter o' taste," interrupted the burglar. "Oxford an'
Cambridge 'as different vocabillaries."

"Did you go to Oxford?" asked Editha politely.

"No," said he, "nor yet to Cambridge."

Then he laughed again, and seemed to be quite enjoying himself as he
made some forks and spoons up into a bundle. "I 'ope there haint no
plated stuff 'ere," he said. "Plate's wulgar, an' I 'ope yer parents
haint wulgar, cos that'd be settin' yer a werry bad example an' sp'ilin'
yer morals."

"I am sure papa and mamma are not vulgar," said Editha.

The burglar opened another drawer, and chuckled again, and this
suggested to Editha's mind another question.

"Is your business a good one?" she suddenly inquired of him.

[Illustration: "It's curious that you should know just where to look for
things," said Editha.]

"'Taint as good as it ought to be, by no manner o' means," said the
burglar. "Every one haint as hobligin' as you, my little dear."

"Oh!" said Editha. "You know you obliged me by not making a noise."

"Well," said the burglar, "as a rule, we don't make a practice o' makin'
no more noise than we can help. It haint considered 'ealthy in the
perfession."

"Would you mind leaving us a few forks and spoons to eat with, if you
please? I beg pardon for interrupting you, but I'm afraid we shall not
have any to use at breakfast."

"Haint yer got no steel uns?" inquired the burglar.

"Mamma wouldn't like to use steel ones, I'm sure," Editha answered.
"I'll tell you what you can do: please leave out enough for mamma, and I
can use steel. I don't care about myself, much."

The man seemed to think a moment, and then he was really so
accommodating as to do as she asked, and even went to the length of
leaving out her own little fork and knife and spoon.

"Oh! you are very kind," said Editha, when she saw him do this.

"That's a reward o' merit, cos yer didn't squeal," said the burglar.

He was so busy for the next few minutes that he did not speak, though
now and then he broke into a low laugh, as if he was thinking of
something very funny, indeed. During the silence, Editha sat holding her
little feet in her night-gown, and watching him very curiously. A great
many new thoughts came into her active brain, and at last she could not
help asking some more questions.

"Would you really rather be a burglar than anything else?" she inquired,
respectfully.

"Well," said the man, "p'r'aps I'd prefer to be Lord Mayor, or a member
o' the 'Ouse o' Lords, or heven the Prince o' Wales, honly for there
bein' hobstacles in the way of it."

"Oh!" said Editha; "you couldn't be the Prince of Wales, you know. I
meant wouldn't you rather be in some other profession? My papa is an
editor," she added. "How would you like to be an editor?"

"Well," said the burglar, "hif yer par ud change with me, or hif he
chanced to know hany heditor with a roarin' trade as ud be so hobligin'
as to 'and it hover, hits wot I've allers 'ad a leanin' to."

[Illustration: "To think o' a forgettin' my card-case," he said.]

"I am sure papa would not like to be a burglar," said Editha,
thoughtfully; "but perhaps he might speak to his friends about you, if
you would give me your name and address, and if I were to tell him how
obliging you were, and if I told him you really didn't like being a
burglar."

The burglar put his hand to his pocket and gave a start of great
surprise.

"To think o' me a forgettin' my card-case," he said, "an' a leavin' it
on the pianner when I come hout. I'm sich a bloomin' forgetful cove. I
might hev knowed I'd hev wanted it."

"It is a pity," said Editha; "but if you told me your name and your
number, I think I could remember it."

"I'm afeared yer couldn't," said the burglar, regretfully, "but I'll try
yer. Lord Halgernon Hedward Halbert de Pentonwille, YdePark. Can you
think o' that?"

"Are you a lord?" exclaimed Editha. "Dear me, how strange!"

"It is sing'lar," said the burglar, shaking his head. "I've hoften
thought so myself. But not wishin' to detain a lady no longer than can
be 'elped, s'pose we take a turn in the lib'ery among yer respected
par's things."

"Don't make a noise," said Editha, as she led the way.

But when they reached the library her loving little heart failed her.
All the things her father valued most were there, and he would be sure
to be so sorry if one thing was missing when he returned. She stood on
the threshold a moment and looked about her.

"Oh," she whispered, "please do me another favor, wont you? Please let
me slip quietly upstairs and bring down my own things instead. They will
be so easy to carry away, and they are very valuable, and--and I will
make you a present of them if you will not touch anything that belongs
to papa. He is so fond of his things and, besides that, he is so good."

The burglar gave a rather strange and disturbed look at her.

"Go an' get yer gimcracks," he said in a somewhat grumbling voice.

[Illustration: Editha came slowly down the staircase with her
treasures.]

Her treasures were in her own room, and her bare feet made no sound as
she crept slowly up the staircase and then down again. But when she
handed the little box to the burglar her eyes were wet.

"Papa gave me the watch, and mamma gave me the locket," she whispered,
tremulously; "and the pearls were grandmamma's, and grandmamma is in
heaven."

It would not be easy to know what the burglar thought; he looked queerer
than ever. Perhaps he was not quite so bad as some burglars, and felt
rather ashamed of taking her treasures from a little girl who loved
other people so much better than she loved herself. But he did not touch
any of papa's belongings, and, indeed, did not remain much longer. He
grumbled a little when he looked into the drawing-room, saying something
to himself about "folks never 'avin' no consideration for a cove, an'
leavin' nothin' portable 'andy, a expectin' of him to carry off
seventy-five pound bronze clocks an' marble stattoos;" but though Editha
was sorry to see that he appeared annoyed, she did not understand him.

After that, he returned to the pantry and helped himself to some cold
game pie, and seemed to enjoy it, and then poured out a tumbler of wine,
which Editha thought a great deal to drink at once.

"Yer 'e'lth, my dear," he said, "an' 'appy returns, an' many on 'em. May
yer grow up a hornyment to yer sect, an' a comfort to yer respected mar
an' par."

And he threw his head very far back, and drank the very last drop in the
glass, which was vulgar, to say the least of it.

Then he took up his bundles of silver and the other articles he had
appropriated, and seeing that he was going away, Editha rose from the
pantry step.

"Are you going out through the window?" she asked.

"Yes, my dear," he answered with a chuckle, "it's a little 'abit I've
got into. I prefers 'em to doors."

"Well, good-by," she said, holding out her hand politely. "And thank
you, my lord."

She felt it only respectable to say that, even if he had fallen into bad
habits and become a burglar.

He shook hands with her in quite a friendly manner, and even made a bow.

"Yer welcome, my dear," he said. "An' I must hadd that if I ever see a
queerer or better behaved little kid, may I be blowed--or, as yer told
me it would be more correcter to say, I'll be blown."

[Illustration: He threw his head very far back, which was vulgar.]

Editha did not know he was joking; she thought he was improving, and
that if he had had advantages he might have been a very nice man.

It was astonishing how neatly he slipped through the window; he was gone
in a second, and Editha found herself standing alone in the dark, as he
had taken his lantern with him.

She groped her way out and up the stairs, and then, for the first time,
she began to feel cold and rather weak and strange; it was more like
being frightened than any feeling she had had while the burglar was in
the house.

"Perhaps, if he had been a very bad burglar, he might have killed me,"
she said to herself, trembling a little. "I am very glad he did not kill
me, for--for it would have hurt mamma so, and papa too, when he came
back, and they told him."

Her mamma wakened in the morning with a bright smile.

"Nobody hurt us, Nixie," she said. "We are all right, aren't we?"

"Yes, mamma dear," said Editha.

She did not want to startle her just then, so she said nothing more, and
she even said nothing all through the excitement that followed the
discovery of the robbery, and indeed, said nothing until her papa came
home, and then he wondered so at her pale face, and petted her so
tenderly, and thought it so strange that nothing but her treasures had
been taken from upstairs, that she could keep her secret no longer.

"Papa," she cried out all at once in a trembling voice, "I gave them to
him myself."

"You, Nixie! You!" exclaimed her papa, looking alarmed. "Kitty, the
fright has made the poor little thing ill."

"No, papa," said Editha, her hands shaking, and the tears rushing into
her eyes, she did not know why. "I heard him, and--I knew mamma would be
so frightened,--and it came into my mind to ask him--not to waken
her,--and I crept down stairs--and asked him;--and he was not at all
unkind though he laughed. And I stayed with him, and--and told him I
would give him all my things if he would not touch yours nor mamma's.
He--he wasn't such a bad burglar, papa,--and he told me he would rather
be something more respectable."

[Illustration: "To think of her risking her dear little life to save
me!"]

And she hid her face on her papa's shoulder.

"Kitty!" papa cried out. "Oh, Kitty!"

Then her mamma flew to her and knelt down by her, kissing her, and
crying aloud:

"Oh, Nixie! if he had hurt you,--if he had hurt you."

"He knew I was not going to scream, mamma," said Editha. "And he knew I
was too little to hurt him. I told him so."

She scarcely understood why mamma cried so much more at this, and why
even papa's eyes were wet as he held her close up to his breast.

"It is my fault, Francis," wept the poor little mamma. "I have left her
too much to herself, and I have not been a wise mother. Oh, to think of
her risking her dear little life just to save me from being frightened,
and to think of her giving up the things she loves for our sakes. I will
be a better mother to her, after this, and take care of her more."

But I am happy to say that the watch and locket and pearls were not
altogether lost, and came back to their gentle little owner in time.
About six months after, the burglar was caught, as burglars are apt to
be, and, after being tried and sentenced to transportation to the penal
settlements (which means that he was to be sent away to be a prisoner in
a far country), a police officer came one day to see Editha's papa, and
he actually came from that burglar, who was in jail and wanted to see
Editha for a special reason. Editha's papa took her to see him, and the
moment she entered his cell she knew him.

"How do you do, my lord?" she said, in a gentle tone.

"Not as lively as common, miss," he answered, "in consekence o' the
confinement not bein' good fer my 'e'lth."

"None of your chaff," said the police officer. "Say what you have to
say."

And then, strange to say, the burglar brought forth from under his
mattress a box, which he handed to the little girl.

"One o' my wisitors brought 'em in to me this mornin," he said. "I
thought yer might as well hev 'em. I kep' 'em partly 'cos it was more
convenienter, an' partly 'cos I took a fancy to yer. I've seed a many
curi's things, sir," he said to Editha's papa, "but never nothin' as
bloomin' queer as that little kid a-comin' in an' tellin' me she wont
'urt me, nor yet wont scream, and please wont I burgle quietly so as to
not disturb her mar. It brought my 'art in my mouth when first I see
her, an' then, lor', how I larft. I almost made up my mind to give her
things back to her afore I left, but I didn't quite do that--it was agin
human natur'."

[Illustration: The burglar brought from under his mattress a box, which
he handed to the little girl.]

But they were in the box now, and Editha was so glad to see them that
she could scarcely speak for a few seconds. Then she thanked the burglar
politely.

"I am much obliged to you," she said, "and I'm really very sorry you are
to be sent so far away. I am sure papa would have tried to help you if
he could, though he says he is afraid you would not do for an editor."

The burglar closed one eye and made a very singular grimace at the
police officer, who turned away suddenly and did not look round until
Editha had bidden her acquaintance good-bye.

And even this was not quite all. A few weeks later, a box was left for
Editha by a very shabby, queer-looking man, who quickly disappeared as
soon as he had given it to the servant at the door; and in this box was
a very large, old-fashioned silver watch, almost as big as a turnip, and
inside the lid were scratched these words:

                           To the little Kid,
                    From 'er fr'end and wel wisher,
                     Lord halgernon hedward halbert
                        de pentonwill, ide park.

                        [Illustration: The box]




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original--this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--In the text versions, delimited italics text in _underscores_ (the
  HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.







End of Project Gutenberg's Editha's Burglar, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDITHA'S BURGLAR ***

***** This file should be named 56692.txt or 56692.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/6/9/56692/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

