The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Lord Fauntleroy (abridged), by 
Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Little Lord Fauntleroy (abridged)
       Für den Schulgebrauch bearbeitet

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Editor: Georg Wolpert
        Otto E. A. Dickmann

Release Date: August 2, 2015 [EBook #49579]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY (ABRIDGED) ***




Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Juliet Sutherland, Jens
Sadowski, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






                      FRANZÖSISCHE UND ENGLISCHE
                           SCHULBIBLIOTHEK

                            HERAUSGEGEBEN
                                 VON
                         OTTO E. A. DICKMANN

                            REIHE A: PROSA

                             BAND LXXVII

                               ENGLISCH

                             LEIPZIG 1904
                       RENGERSCHE BUCHHANDLUNG
                         GEBHARDT & WILISCH.




                                LITTLE
                           LORD FAUNTLEROY


                                 VON
                       FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT

                   FÜR DEN SCHULGEBRAUCH BEARBEITET
                                 VON
                              G. WOLPERT

                           SIEBENTE AUFLAGE

                             LEIPZIG 1904
                       RENGERSCHE BUCHHANDLUNG
                         GEBHARDT & WILISCH.

              Mit gütiger Erlaubnis der Verlagshandlung
                   _Bernhard Tauchnitz_ in Leipzig.

                 Druck von Hugo Wilisch in Chemnitz.




                     Vorwort zur ersten Auflage.


Bei der Bearbeitung des vorliegenden Auszugs aus _Burnetts_[1]
fesselndem Romane für die Schule, lag mir nach den Grundsätzen der
Französischen und Englischen Schulbibliothek zunächst die Aufgabe ob,
denselben so zu kürzen, daß der Inhalt des Bändchens in einem Semester
bewältigt werden kann. Es wurden deshalb alle für die Entwicklung der
Erzählung nicht unbedingt nötigen Teile ausgeschieden, der übrige Text
aber noch soweit gekürzt, als es die Rücksicht auf die Klarheit der
Schilderung und die Korrektheit des Ausdrucks zuließ. Dadurch ist es mir
gelungen, das Ganze auf etwa ein Dritteil des ursprünglichen Umfanges zu
beschränken, ohne jedoch den Zusammenhang zu stören und die feine
Zeichnung der Charaktere der Hauptpersonen zu verwischen. Nur an einer
Stelle war eine etwas gewaltsame Verschmelzung mehrerer Seiten in wenige
Zeilen (S. 82, Z. 30-36) nicht zu umgehen; aber auch da erwies sich
gewissenhafte Wahrung der von Burnett selbst gebrauchten Ausdrucksweise
als möglich.

Sachliche Anmerkungen brauchten nur in beschränktem Maße gegeben zu
werden, dagegen hielt ich es für angezeigt, mit den Fußnoten nicht allzu
sparsam zu sein, einmal weil verschiedene Amerikanismen (store, boss,
ranch u. a.), sowie eine große Anzahl vulgärer oder familiärer Ausdrücke
eine Erklärung erheischten, sodann weil gar manche Stelle des Textes für
die Übersetzung in gutes Deutsch nicht ohne Schwierigkeit ist. Häufiger
in der Umgangssprache erscheinende Kürzungen, wie: I'd, he'd, I'll,
he'll u. a., die in den meisten Grammatiken angeführt sind, wurden als
bekannt vorausgesetzt. Bei dem S. 83 vollständig abgedruckten Briefe
Cedrics unterblieb der Raumersparnis halber die Wiedergabe in korrektes
Englisch, soweit nicht die Rücksicht auf das Verständnis es verlangte.

Möge dieses Bändchen, das für die mittleren Klassen aller Anstalten eine
anregende Lektüre bieten wird, die freundliche Aufnahme finden, die dem
kleinen Helden der Erzählung in der Alten wie in der Neuen Welt zu teil
geworden ist.

MÜNCHEN, im Januar 1894.

[Fußnote 1: _Frances Hodgson Burnett_ wurde am 28. November 1849 zu
Manchester geboren und kam schon sehr jung nach Amerika. Aus der Reihe
der von ihr veröffentlichten Romane und Erzählungen verdienen neben
»Little Lord Fauntleroy«, zuerst erschienen in St. Nicholas Magazine
(1886), besonders Erwähnung: »That Lass o' Lowries«, »A Fair Barbarian«,
»Through One Administration«, »Sara Crewe«, »Editha's Burglar«, »The
Pretty Sister of José« und die Novellensammlung »Vagabondia«.
Verschiedene derselben, auch »Little Lord«, wurden dramatisiert und mit
großem Erfolge in Deutschland, Amerika und England aufgeführt.]




                     Vorwort zur zweiten Auflage.


Die günstige Aufnahme, welche diese Ausgabe des _Little Lord_ bei den
Herren Fachgenossen und bei der Kritik gefunden, hat schon nach Verlauf
von nicht ganz zwei Jahren eine neue Auflage nötig gemacht. In dieser
ist der Text mit Ausnahme einer einzigen Stelle (S. 79, Z. 14), wo ich
sinnrichtiger _a_ statt _any_ setzte, unverändert geblieben; die
früheren Fußnoten sind nach der Vorschrift der Redaktion mit den
sachlichen Anmerkungen verbunden, letztere einer genauen Durchsicht
unterzogen und um einige vermehrt worden.

MÜNCHEN, im Januar 1896.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Für die in die vierte Auflage aufgenommenen sprachlichen Erläuterungen
zu S. 66. Z. 21 und S. 83, Z. 4 bin ich Herrn Prof. Dr. Thiergen zu Dank
verpflichtet.

MÜNCHEN, im Dezember 1898.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Die vorliegende siebente Auflage ist, wie die beiden vorhergehenden, ein
unveränderter Abdruck der vierten.

MÜNCHEN, im Februar 1904.

                                                        Georg Wolpert,
                                                         K. Professor.




                       LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY.




                              CHAPTER I.
                          A GREAT SURPRISE.


Cedric himself knew nothing whatever about it. It had never been even
mentioned to him. He knew that his papa had been an Englishman, because
his mamma had told him so; but then his papa had died when he was so
little a boy that he could not remember very much about him, except that
he was big, and had blue eyes and a long moustache, and that it was a
splendid thing to be carried around the room on his shoulder. Since his
papa's death, Cedric had found out that it was best not to talk to his
mamma about him. When his father was ill, Cedric had been sent away, and
when he had returned, everything was over; and his mother, who had been
very ill, too, was only just beginning to sit in her chair by the
window. She was pale and thin, and all the dimples had gone from her
pretty face, and her eyes looked large and mournful, and she was dressed
in black.

He and his mamma knew very few people, and lived what might have been
thought very lonely lives, although Cedric did not know it was lonely
until he grew older and heard why it was they had no visitors. Then he
was told that his mamma was an orphan, and quite alone in the world when
his papa had married her. Their marriage brought them the ill-will of
several persons. The one who was most angry of all, however, was the
Captain's father, who lived in England, and was a very rich and
important old nobleman, with a very bad temper, and a very violent
dislike to America and Americans. He had two sons older than Captain
Cedric; and it was the law that the elder of these sons should inherit
the family title and estates, which were very rich and splendid; if the
eldest son died the next one would be heir; so though he was a member of
such a great family, there was little chance that Captain Cedric would
be very rich himself.

But it so happened that Nature had given to the younger son gifts which
she had not bestowed upon his elder brothers. He had a beautiful face
and a fine, strong, graceful figure; he had a bright smile and a sweet,
gay voice; he was brave and generous, and had the kindest heart in the
world, and seemed to have the power to make every one love him. But it
was not so with his elder brothers; neither of them was handsome, or
kind, or clever; they cared nothing for study, and wasted both time and
money, and made few real friends. The old Earl, their father, was
constantly disappointed and humiliated by them; his heir was no honour
to his noble name. It was very bitter, the old Earl thought, that the
son who was only third, should be the one who had all the gifts, and all
the charms. Sometimes he almost hated the handsome young man because he
seemed to have the good things which should have gone with the stately
title and the magnificent estates. It was in one of his fits of
petulance that he sent him off to travel in America.

But after about six months, he began to feel lonely, and longed in
secret to see his son again, so he wrote to Captain Cedric and ordered
him home. The letter he wrote crossed on its way a letter the Captain
had just written to his father telling of his love for the pretty
American girl, and of his intended marriage; and when the Earl received
that letter, he was furiously angry. Bad as his temper was, he had never
given way to it in his life as he gave way to it when he read the
Captain's letter. For an hour he raged like a tiger, and then he sat
down and wrote to his son, and ordered him never to come near his old
home, nor to write to his father or brothers again.

The Captain was very sad when he read the letter; he was very fond of
England, and he dearly loved the beautiful home where he had been born;
he had even loved his ill-tempered old father; but he knew he need
expect no kindness from him in the future. At first he scarcely knew
what to do; he had not been brought up to work, and had no business
experience, but he had courage and plenty of determination. So he sold
his commission in the English army, and after some trouble found a
situation in New York, and married. The change from his old life in
England was very great, but he was young and happy and he hoped that
hard work would do great things for him in the future. He had a small
house in a quiet street, and his little boy was born there. Though he
was born in so quiet and cheap a little home, it seemed as if there
never had been a more fortunate baby. In the first place, he was always
well, and so he never gave any one trouble; in the second place he had
so sweet a temper and ways so charming that he was a pleasure to every
one; and in the third place he was so beautiful to look at that he was
quite a picture.

When he was old enough to walk out with his nurse, he was so handsome
and strong and rosy that he attracted every one's attention, and his
nurse would come home and tell his mamma stories of the ladies who had
stopped their carriages to look at and speak to him, and of how pleased
they were when he talked to them in his cheerful little way, as if he
had known them always. His greatest charm was this cheerful, fearless,
quaint little way of making friends with people.

As he grew older, he had a great many quaint little ways which amused
and interested people greatly. He was so much of a companion for his
mother that she scarcely cared for any other. They used to walk together
and talk together and play together. When he was quite a little fellow
he learned to read; and after that he used to lie on the hearth-rug, in
the evening, and read aloud--sometimes stories, and sometimes big books
such as older people read, and sometimes even the newspaper; and often
at such times Mary, in the kitchen, would hear Mrs. Errol laughing with
delight at the quaint things he said.

Mary was very fond of him, and very proud of him, too. She had been with
his mother ever since he was born; and, after his father's death, had
been cook and housemaid and nurse and everything else.

"Ristycratic, is it?" she would say. "It's like a young lord he looks."

Cedric did not know that he looked like a young lord; he did not know
what a lord was. His greatest friend was the groceryman at the corner.
His name was Mr. Hobbs, and Cedric admired and respected him very much.
He thought him a very rich and powerful person, he had so many things in
his store--prunes and figs and oranges and biscuits,--and he had a horse
and waggon. Cedric was fond of the milkman and the baker and the
apple-woman, but he liked Mr. Hobbs best of all, and was on terms of
such intimacy with him that he went to see him every day, and often sat
with him quite a long time discussing the topics of the hour. It was
quite surprising how many things they found to talk about--the Fourth of
July, for instance. When they began to talk about the Fourth of July
there really seemed no end to it. Mr. Hobbs had a very bad opinion of
"the British," and he told the whole story of the Revolution, relating
very wonderful and patriotic stories about the villainy of the enemy and
the bravery of the Revolutionary heroes, and he even generously repeated
part of the Declaration of Independence. Cedric was so excited that his
eyes shone and he could hardly wait to eat his dinner after he went
home, he was so anxious to tell his mamma. It was, perhaps, Mr. Hobbs
who gave him his first interest in politics. Mr. Hobbs was fond of
reading the newspapers, and so Cedric heard a great deal about what was
going on in Washington; and Mr. Hobbs would tell him whether the
President was doing his duty or not.

When Cedric was between seven and eight years old, the very strange
thing happened which made so wonderful a change in his life. It was
quite curious, too, that the day it happened he had been talking to Mr.
Hobbs about England and the Queen, and Mr. Hobbs had said some very
severe things about the aristocracy, being specially indignant against
earls and marquises.

They were in the midst of their conversation, when Mary appeared. Cedric
thought she had come to buy some sugar, perhaps, but she had not. She
looked almost pale and as if she were excited about something.

"Come home, darlint," she said; "the mistress is wantin' yez."

Cedric slipped down from his stool.

"Does she want me to go out with her, Mary?" he asked. "Good morning,
Mr. Hobbs. I'll see you again."

When he reached his own house there was a coupé standing before the
door, and some one was in the little parlour talking to his mamma. Mary
hurried him up stairs and put on his best summer suit of cream-coloured
flannel with the red scarf around the waist, and combed out his curly
locks.

When he was dressed, he ran down stairs and went into the parlour. A
tall, thin old gentleman with a sharp face was sitting in an arm-chair.
His mother was standing near by with a pale face, and he saw that there
were tears in her eyes.

"Oh, Ceddie!" she cried out, and ran to her little boy and caught him in
her arms and kissed him in a little frightened, troubled way. "Oh,
Ceddie, darling!"

The tall old gentleman rose from his chair and looked at Cedric with his
sharp eyes. He rubbed his thin chin with his bony hand as he looked.

He seemed not at all displeased.

"And so," he said at last, slowly,--"and so this is little Lord
Fauntleroy."




                             CHAPTER II.
                          CEDRIC'S FRIENDS.


There was never a more amazed little boy than Cedric during the week
that followed; there was never so strange or so unreal a week. In the
first place, the story his mamma told him was a very curious one. He was
obliged to hear it two or three times before he could understand it. He
could not imagine what Mr. Hobbs would think of it. It began with earls;
his grandpapa, whom he had never seen, was an earl; and his eldest
uncle, if he had not been killed by a fall from his horse, would have
been an earl, too, in time; and after his death, his other uncle would
have been an earl, if he had not died suddenly, in Rome, of a fever.
After that, his own papa, if he had lived, would have been an earl; but
since they all had died and only Cedric was left, it appeared that _he_
was to be an earl after his grandpapa's death--and for the present he
was Lord Fauntleroy.

He turned quite pale when he was first told of it.

"Oh! Dearest!" he said, "I should rather not be an earl. None of the
boys are earls. Can't I _not_ be one?"

But it seemed to be unavoidable. And when, that evening, they sat
together by the open window looking out into the shabby street, he and
his mother had a long talk about it. Cedric sat on his footstool,
clasping one knee in his favourite attitude and wearing a bewildered
little face rather red from the exertion of thinking. His grandfather
had sent for him to come to England, and his mamma thought he must go.

"Because," she said, looking out of the window with sorrowful eyes, "I
know your papa would wish it to be so, Ceddie. I should be a selfish
little mother if I did not send you. When you are a man you will see
why."

Ceddie shook his head mournfully. "I shall be very sorry to leave Mr.
Hobbs," he said.

When Mr. Havisham--who was the family lawyer of the Earl of Dorincourt,
and who had been sent by him to bring Lord Fauntleroy to England--came
the next day, Cedric heard many things. But, somehow, it did not console
him to hear that he was to be a very rich man when he grew up, and that
he would have castles here and castles there, and great parks and deep
mines and grand estates and tenantry. He was troubled about his friend,
Mr. Hobbs, and he went to see him at the store soon after breakfast, in
great anxiety of mind.

He found him reading the morning paper, and he approached him with a
grave demeanour. He really felt it would be a great shock to Mr. Hobbs
to hear what had befallen him, and on his way to the store he had been
thinking how it would be best to break the news.

"Hello!" said Mr. Hobbs. "Mornin'!"

"Good-morning," said Cedric.

He did not climb up on the high stool as usual, but sat down on a
biscuit-box and clasped his knee, and was so silent for a few moments
that Mr. Hobbs finally looked up inquiringly over the top of his
newspaper.

"Hello!" he said again.

Cedric gathered all his strength of mind together.

"Mr. Hobbs," he said, "do you remember what we were talking about
yesterday morning?"

"Well," replied Mr. Hobbs,--"seems to me it was England."

"Yes," said Cedric; "but just when Mary came for me, you know?"

Mr. Hobbs rubbed the back of his head.

"We _was_ mentioning Queen Victoria and the aristocracy."

"Yes," said Cedric, rather hesitatingly, "and--and earls; don't you
know?"

"Why, yes," returned Mr. Hobbs; "that's so!"

"You said," proceeded Cedric, "that you wouldn't have them sitting
'round on your biscuit barrels."

"So I did!" returned Mr. Hobbs, stoutly.

"Mr. Hobbs," said Cedric, "one is sitting on this box now!"

Mr. Hobbs almost jumped out of his chair.

"What!" he exclaimed.

"Yes," Cedric announced, with due modesty; "_I_ am one--or I am going to
be. I shan't deceive you."

Mr. Hobbs looked agitated. He rose up suddenly and went to look at the
thermometer.

"The mercury's got into your head!" he exclaimed, turning back to
examine his young friend's countenance. "It _is_ a hot day! How do you
feel?"

He put his big hand on the little boy's hair.

"Thank you," said Ceddie; "I'm all right. There is nothing the matter
with my head. I'm sorry to say it's true, Mr. Hobbs. That was what Mary
came to take me home for. Mr. Havisham was telling my mamma, and he is a
lawyer."

Mr. Hobbs sank into his chair and mopped his forehead with his
handkerchief.

"_One_ of us has got a sunstroke!" he exclaimed.

"No," returned Cedric, "we have not. Mr. Havisham came all the way from
England to tell us about it. My grandpapa sent him."

Mr. Hobbs stared wildly at the innocent, serious little face before him.

"Who is your grandfather?" he asked.

Cedric put his hand in his pocket and carefully drew out a piece of
paper, on which something was written in his own round, irregular hand.

"I couldn't easily remember it, so I wrote it down on this," he said.
And he read aloud slowly: "'John Arthur Molyneux Errol, Earl of
Dorincourt.' That is his name, and he lives in a castle--in two or three
castles, I think. And my papa, who died, was his youngest son; and I
shouldn't have been a lord or an earl if my papa hadn't died; and my
papa wouldn't have been an earl if his two brothers hadn't died, and my
grandpapa has sent for me to come to England."

Mr. Hobbs seemed to grow hotter and hotter. He mopped his forehead and
breathed hard. He began to see that something very remarkable had
happened.

"Wha--what did you say your name was?" Mr. Hobbs inquired.

"It's Cedric Errol, Lord Fauntleroy," answered Cedric. "That was what
Mr. Havisham called me."

"Well," said Mr. Hobbs, "I'll be--jiggered!"

This was an exclamation he always used when he was very much astonished
or excited. He could think of nothing else to say just at that puzzling
moment.

Cedric looked at Mr. Hobbs wistfully.

"England is a long way off, isn't it?" he asked.

"It's across the Atlantic Ocean," Mr. Hobbs answered.

"That's the worst of it," said Cedric. "Perhaps I shall not see you
again for a long time. I don't like to think of that, Mr. Hobbs."

"The best of friends must part," said Mr. Hobbs.

"Well," said Cedric, "we have been friends for a great many years,
haven't we?"

"Ever since you was born," Mr. Hobbs answered.

"Ah," remarked Cedric, with a sigh, "I never thought I should have to be
an earl then!"

"You think," said Mr. Hobbs, "there's no getting out of it?"

"I'm afraid not," answered Cedric. "My mamma says that my papa would
wish me to do it. But if I have to be an earl, I can try to be a good
one. I'm not going to be a tyrant."

His conversation with Mr. Hobbs was a long and serious one. Once having
got over the first shock, Mr. Hobbs endeavoured to resign himself to the
situation, and before the interview was at an end he had asked a great
many questions. As Cedric could answer but few of them, he endeavoured
to answer them himself, and explained many things in a way which would
probably have astonished Mr. Havisham, could that gentleman have heard
it.

But then there were many things which astonished Mr. Havisham. He had
known all about the old Earl's disappointment in his elder sons and all
about his fierce rage at Captain Cedric's American marriage, and he knew
how he still hated the gentle little widow and would not speak of her
except with bitter and cruel words. He insisted that she was only a
common American girl, who had entrapped his son into marrying her
because she knew he was an earl's son. The old lawyer himself had more
than half believed this was all true. When he had been driven into the
cheap street, and his coupé had stopped before the cheap small house, he
had felt actually shocked.

When Mary handed him into the small parlour he looked around it
critically. It was plainly furnished but it had a home-like look; the
few adornments on the walls were in good taste, and about the room were
many pretty things which a woman's hand might have made.

The lawyer's experience taught him to read people's characters very
shrewdly, and as soon as he saw Cedric's mother he knew that the old
Earl had made a great mistake in thinking her a vulgar, mercenary woman.

When he first told Mrs. Errol what he had come for, she turned very
pale.

"Oh!" she said; "will he have to be taken away from me? We love each
other so much! He is such a happiness to me! He is all I have." And her
sweet young voice trembled, and the tears rushed into her eyes. "You do
not know what he has been to me!" she said.

The lawyer cleared his throat.

"I am obliged to tell you," he said, "that the Earl of Dorincourt is
not--is not very friendly toward you. He is an old man, and his
prejudices are very strong. He has always especially disliked America
and Americans, and was very much enraged by his son's marriage. I am
sorry to be the bearer of so unpleasant a communication, but he is very
fixed in his determination not to see you. His plan is that Lord
Fauntleroy shall be educated under his own supervision; that he shall
live with him. The Earl is attached to Dorincourt Castle, and spends a
great deal of time there. Lord Fauntleroy will, therefore, be likely to
live chiefly at Dorincourt. The Earl offers to you as a home, Court
Lodge, which is situated pleasantly, and is not very far from the
castle. He also offers you a suitable income. Lord Fauntleroy will be
permitted to visit you; the only stipulation is, that you shall not
visit him. You see you will not be really separated from your son."

He felt a little uneasy lest she should begin to cry or make a scene.

But she did not. She went to the window and stood with her face turned
away for a few moments.

"Captain Errol was very fond of Dorincourt," she said at last. "He loved
England, and everything English. It was always a grief to him that he
was parted from his home. I know he would wish, that his son should know
the beautiful old places, and be brought up in such a way as would be
suitable to his future position."

Then she came back to the table and stood looking up at Mr. Havisham
very gently.

"My husband would wish it," she said. "It will be best for my little
boy. I know--I am sure the Earl would not be so unkind as to try to
teach him not to love me; and I know--even if he tried--that my little
boy is too much like his father to be harmed. I hope, that his
grandfather will love Ceddie. The little boy has a very affectionate
nature; and he has always been loved."

Mr. Havisham cleared his throat again. He could not quite imagine the
gouty, fiery-tempered old Earl loving any one very much; but he knew
that if Ceddie were at all a credit to his name, his grandfather would
be proud of him.

"Lord Fauntleroy will be comfortable, I am sure," he replied. "It was
with a view to his happiness that the Earl desired that you should be
near enough to him to see him frequently."

When the door opened and the child came into the room, he recognised in
an instant that here was one of the finest and handsomest little fellows
he had ever seen. His beauty was something unusual. He had a strong,
lithe, graceful little body and a manly little face; he was so like his
father that it was really startling; he had his father's golden hair and
his mother's brown eyes. They were innocently fearless eyes; he looked
as if he had never feared or doubted anything in his life.

"He is the best-bred-looking and handsomest little fellow I ever saw,"
was what Mr. Havisham thought. What he said aloud was simply, "And so
this is little Lord Fauntleroy."

Cedric did not know he was being observed, and he only behaved himself
in his ordinary manner. He shook hands with Mr. Havisham in his friendly
way when they were introduced to each other, and he answered all his
questions with the unhesitating readiness with which he answered Mr.
Hobbs.

The next time Mr. Havisham met him, he had quite a long conversation
with him--a conversation which made him smile, and rub his chin with his
bony hand several times.

Mrs. Errol had been called out of the parlour, and the lawyer and Cedric
were left together.

Mr. Havisham sat in an arm-chair on one side of the open window; on the
other side was another still larger chair, and Cedric sat in that and
looked at Mr. Havisham. There was a short silence after Mrs. Errol went
out, and Cedric seemed to be studying Mr. Havisham, and Mr. Havisham was
certainly studying Cedric. He could not make up his mind as to what an
elderly gentleman should say to a little boy.

But Cedric relieved him by suddenly beginning the conversation himself.

"Do you know," he said, "I don't know what an earl is?"

"Don't you?" said Mr. Havisham.

"No," replied Ceddie. "And I think when a boy is going to be one, he
ought to know. Don't you?"

"Well--yes," answered Mr. Havisham, "An earl is--is a very important
person."

"So is a president!" put in Ceddie.

"An earl," Mr. Havisham went on, "is frequently of very ancient
lineage----"

"What's that?" asked Ceddie.

"Of very old family--extremely old."

"Ah!" said Cedric, thrusting his hands deeper into his pockets. "I
suppose that is the way with the apple-woman near the park. I dare say
she is of ancient lin-lenage. She is so old it would surprise you how
she can stand up."

Mr. Havisham felt rather at a loss as he looked at his companion's
innocent, serious little face.

"I am afraid you did not quite understand me," he explained. "When I
said 'ancient lineage' I did not mean old age; I meant that the name of
such a family has been known in the world a long time; perhaps for
hundreds of years persons bearing that name have been known and spoken
of in the history of their country."

"Like George Washington," said Ceddie. "I've heard of him ever since I
was born, and he was known about long before that. Mr. Hobbs says he
will never be forgotten. That's because of the Declaration of
Independence, you know, and the Fourth of July. You see, he was a very
brave man."

"The first Earl of Dorincourt," said Mr. Havisham solemnly, "was created
an earl four hundred years ago."

"Well, well!" said Ceddie. "That was a long time ago! Did you tell
Dearest that? It would int'rust her very much. She always likes to hear
cur'us things. What else does an earl do besides being created?"

"A great many of them have helped to govern England. Some of them have
been brave men and have fought in great battles in the old days."

"I should like to do that myself," said Cedric. "My papa was a soldier,
and he was a very brave man--as brave as George Washington. Perhaps that
was because he would have been an earl if he hadn't died. I am glad
earls are brave. That's a great 'vantage--to be a brave man."

"There is another advantage in being an earl, sometimes," said Mr.
Havisham slowly. "Some earls have a great deal of money."

He was curious because he wondered if his young friend knew what the
power of money was.

"That's a good thing to have," said Ceddie innocently. "I wish I had a
great deal of money."

"Do you?" said Mr. Havisham. "And why?"

"Well," explained Cedric, "there are so many things a person can do with
money. You see there's the apple-woman. If I were very rich I should buy
her a little tent to put her stall in, and a little stove, and then I
should give her a dollar every morning it rained, so that she could
afford to stay at home."

"Ahem!" said Mr. Havisham. "And what else would you do if you were
rich?"

"Oh! I'd do a great many things. Of course I should buy Dearest all
sorts of beautiful things, needle-books and fans and gold thimbles and
rings, and an encyclopedia, and a carriage, so that she needn't have to
wait for the street-cars. And then Dick----"

"Who is Dick?" asked Mr. Havisham.

"Dick is a boot-black," said his young lordship, quite warming up in his
interest in plans so exciting. "He is one of the nicest boot-blacks you
ever knew. He stands at the corner of a street down town. I've known him
for years. Once when I was very little, I was walking out with Dearest
and she bought me a beautiful ball that bounced, and I was carrying it,
and it bounced into the middle of the street where the carriages and
horses were, and I was so disappointed, I began to cry--I was very
little. Dick ran in between the horses and caught the ball for me and
wiped it off with his coat and gave it to me and said; 'It's all right,
young un.' So Dearest admired him very much, and so did I, and ever
since then, when we go down town, we talk to him."

"And what would you like to do for him?" inquired the lawyer, rubbing
his chin and smiling a queer smile.

"Well," said Lord Fauntleroy, settling himself in his chair with a
business air; "I'd buy Jake out."

"And who is Jake?" Mr. Havisham asked.

"He's Dick's partner, and he is the worst partner a fellow could have!
Dick says so. He isn't a credit to the business, and he isn't square. He
cheats, and that makes Dick mad. So if I were rich, I'd buy Jake out and
I'd get Dick some new clothes and new brushes, and start him out fair."

"What would you get for yourself, if you were rich?" asked Mr. Havisham.

"Lots of things!" answered Lord Fauntleroy briskly: "but first I'd give
Mary some money for Bridget--that's her sister, with twelve children,
and a husband out of work. And I think Mr. Hobbs would like a gold watch
and chain to remember me by, and a meerschaum pipe."

The door opened and Mrs. Errol came in.

"I am sorry to have been obliged to leave you so long," she said to Mr.
Havisham; "but a poor woman, who is in great trouble, came to see me."

"This young gentleman," said Mr. Havisham, "has been telling me about
some of his friends, and what he would do for them if he were rich."

"Bridget is one of his friends," said Mrs. Errol; "and it is Bridget to
whom I have been talking in the kitchen. She is in great trouble now
because her husband has rheumatic fever."

Cedric slipped down out of his big chair.

"I think I'll go and see her," he said, "and ask her how he is. He's a
nice man when he is well, he once made me a sword out of wood."

He ran out of the room, and Mr. Havisham rose from his chair. He seemed
to have something in his mind which he wished to speak of. He hesitated
a moment, and then said, looking down at Mrs. Errol:

"Before I left Dorincourt Castle I had an interview with the Earl, in
which he gave me some instructions. He said that I must let his lordship
know that the change in his life would bring him money and the pleasures
children enjoy; if he expressed any wishes I was to gratify them, and to
tell him that his grandfather had given him what he wished. I am aware
that the Earl did not expect anything quite like this; but if it would
give Lord Fauntleroy pleasure to assist this poor woman, I should feel
that the Earl would be displeased if he were not gratified."

"Oh!" Mrs. Errol said, "that was very kind of the Earl; Cedric will be
so glad! He has always been fond of Bridget and Michael. They are quite
deserving."

Mr. Havisham put his thin hand in his breast pocket and drew forth a
large pocket-book. There was a queer look in his keen face. The truth
was, he was wondering what the Earl of Dorincourt would say when he was
told what was the first wish of his grandson that had been granted.

"I do not know that you have realised," he said, "that the Earl of
Dorincourt is an exceedingly rich man. I think it would please him to
know that Lord Fauntleroy had been indulged in any fancy. If you will
call him back and allow me, I shall give him five pounds for these
people."

"That would be twenty-five dollars!" exclaimed Mrs. Errol. "It will seem
like wealth to them. I can scarcely believe that it is true."

"It is quite true," said Mr. Havisham, with his dry smile. "A great
change has taken place in your son's life, a great deal of power will
lie in his hands."

"Oh!" cried his mother. "And he is such a little boy--a very little boy.
How can I teach him to use it well? It makes me half afraid. My pretty
little Ceddie!"

The lawyer slightly cleared his throat. It touched his worldly, hard old
heart to see the tender, timid look in her brown eyes.

"I think, madam," he said, "that if I may judge from my interview with
Lord Fauntleroy this morning, the next Earl of Dorincourt will think for
others as well as for his noble self. He is only a child yet, but I
think he may be trusted."

Then his mother went for Cedric and brought him back into the parlour.

His little face looked quite anxious when he came in. He was very sorry
for Bridget.

"Dearest said you wanted me," he said to Mr. Havisham. "I've been
talking to Bridget."

Mr. Havisham looked down at him a moment. He felt a little awkward and
undecided. As Cedric's mother had said, he was a very little boy.

"The Earl of Dorincourt----" he began, and then he glanced involuntarily
at Mrs. Errol.

Little Lord Fauntleroy's mother suddenly kneeled down by him and put
both her tender arms around his childish body.

"Ceddie," she said, "the Earl is your grandpapa, your own papa's father.
He is very, very kind, and he loves you and wishes you to love him,
because the sons who were his little boys are dead. He wishes you to be
happy and to make other people happy. He is very rich, and he wishes you
to have everything you would like to have. He told Mr. Havisham so, and
gave him a great deal of money for you. You can give some to Bridget
now, enough to pay her rent and buy Michael everything. Isn't that fine,
Ceddie? Isn't he good?" And she kissed the child on his round cheek,
where the bright colour suddenly flashed up in his excited amazement.

He looked from his mother to Mr. Havisham.

"Can I have it now?" he cried. "Can I give it to her this minute? She's
just going."

Mr. Havisham handed him the money. It was in fresh clean greenbacks and
made a neat roll.

Ceddie flew out of the room.

"Bridget!" they heard him shout, as he tore into the kitchen. "Bridget,
wait a minute! Here's some money. It's for you, and you can pay the
rent. My grandpapa gave it to me. It's for you and Michael!"

"Oh, Master Ceddie!" cried Bridget, in an awestricken voice. "It's
twinty-foive dollars is here. Where's the mistress?"

"I think I shall have to go and explain it to her," Mrs. Errol said.

So she, too, went out of the room, and Mr. Havisham was left alone for a
while. He went to the window and stood looking out into the street
reflectively. He was thinking of the old Earl of Dorincourt, sitting in
his great, splendid, gloomy library at the castle, gouty and lonely,
surrounded by grandeur and luxury, but not really loved by any one,
because in all his long life he had never really loved any one but
himself. He could fill his castle with guests if he chose, but he knew
that in secret the people who would accept his invitations were afraid
of his frowning old face and sarcastic, biting speeches.

Mr. Havisham knew his hard, fierce ways by heart, and he was thinking of
him as he looked out of the window into the quiet, narrow street. And
there rose in his mind, in sharp contrast, the picture of the cheery,
handsome little fellow sitting in the big chair and telling his story of
his friends, Dick and the apple-woman, in his generous, innocent, honest
way. And he thought of the immense income, the beautiful, majestic
estates, the wealth, and power for good or evil, which in the course of
time would lie in the small, chubby hands little Lord Fauntleroy thrust
so deep into his pockets.

"It will make a great difference," he said to himself. "It will make a
great difference."

Cedric and his mother came back soon after. Cedric was in high spirits.
He was glowing with enjoyment of Bridget's relief and rapture.

"She cried!" he said. "She said she was crying for joy. I never saw any
one cry for joy before. My grandpapa must be a very good man. I didn't
know he was so good a man. It's more--more agreeable to be an earl than
I thought it was. I'm almost glad--I'm almost _quite_ glad I'm going to
be one."




                             CHAPTER III.
                            LEAVING HOME.


Cedric's good opinion of the advantages of being an earl increased
greatly during the next week. It seemed almost impossible for him to
realise that there was scarcely anything he might wish to do which he
could not do easily; in fact I think it may be said that he did not
fully realise it at all. But at least he understood, after a few
conversations with Mr. Havisham, that he could gratify all his nearest
wishes, and he proceeded to gratify them with a simplicity and delight
which caused Mr. Havisham much diversion. In the week before they sailed
for England, he did many curious things. The lawyer long after
remembered the morning they went down together to pay a visit to Dick,
and the afternoon they so amazed the apple-woman of ancient lineage by
stopping before her stall and telling her she was to have a tent, and a
stove, and a shawl, and a sum of money which seemed to her quite
wonderful.

"For I have to go to England and be a lord," explained Cedric,
sweet-temperedly.

"She's a very good apple-woman," he said to Mr. Havisham as they walked
away, leaving the proprietress of the stall almost gasping for breath,
and not at all believing in her great fortune. "Once, when I fell down
and cut my knee, she gave me an apple for nothing. I've always
remembered her for it. You know you always remember people who are kind
to you."

It had never occurred to his honest, simple, little mind that there were
people who could forget kindnesses.

The interview with Dick was quite exciting. Dick had just been having a
great deal of trouble with Jake, and was in low spirits when they saw
him. His amazement when Cedric calmly announced that they had come to
give him what seemed a very great thing to him, and would set all his
troubles right, almost struck him dumb. Lord Fauntleroy's manner of
announcing the object of his visit was very simple and unceremonious and
the end of the matter was that Dick bought Jake out, and found himself
the possessor of the business, and some new brushes and a most
astonishing sign and outfit. He could not believe in his good luck any
more easily than the apple-woman of ancient lineage could believe in
hers. He scarcely seemed to realise anything until Cedric put out his
hand to shake hands with him before going away.

"Well, good-bye," he said; and though he tried to speak steadily, there
was a little tremble in his voice and he winked his big brown eyes. "And
I hope trade'll be good. I'm sorry I'm going away to leave you, but I
wish you'd write to me, because we were always good friends. And here's
where you must send your letter." And he gave him a slip of paper. "And
my name isn't Cedric Errol any more; it's Lord Fauntleroy and--and
good-bye, Dick."

Dick winked his eyes also, and yet they looked rather moist about the
lashes.

"I wish ye wasn't goin' away," he said in a husky voice. Then he winked
his eyes again. Then he looked at Mr. Havisham and touched his cap.
"Thanky, sir, for bringin' him down here an' fur wot ye've done."

Until the day of his departure, his lordship spent as much time as
possible with Mr. Hobbs in the store. Gloom had settled upon Mr. Hobbs;
he was much depressed in spirits. When his young friend brought to him
in triumph the parting gift of a gold watch and chain, Mr. Hobbs found
it difficult to acknowledge it properly. He laid the case on his stout
knee, and blew his nose violently several times.

"There's something written on it," said Cedric,--"inside the case. I
told the man myself what to say. 'From his oldest friend, Lord
Fauntleroy, to Mr. Hobbs. When this you see, remember me.' I don't want
you to forget me."

Mr. Hobbs blew his nose very loudly again.

"I shan't forget you," he said, speaking a trifle huskily, as Dick had
spoken; "nor don't you go and forget me when you get among the British
aristocracy."

"I shouldn't forget you, whoever I was among," answered his lordship.
"I've spent my happiest hours with you; at least, some of my happiest
hours. I hope you'll come to see me some time."

At last all the preparations were complete; the day came when the trunks
were taken to the steamer, and the hour arrived when the carriage stood
at the door. Then a curious feeling of loneliness came upon the little
boy. His mamma had been shut up in her room for some time; when she came
down the stairs, her eyes looked large and wet, and her sweet mouth was
trembling. Cedric went to her, and she bent down to him, and he put his
arms around her and they kissed each other. He knew something made them
both sorry, though he scarcely knew what it was; but one tender little
thought rose to his lips.

"We liked this little house, Dearest, didn't we?" he said. "We always
will like it, won't we?"

"Yes--yes," she answered in a low, sweet voice. "Yes, darling."

And then they went into the carriage and Cedric sat very close to her,
and as she looked back out of the window, he looked at her and stroked
her hand and held it close.

And then, it seemed almost directly, they were on the steamer in the
midst of the wildest bustle and confusion; carriages were driving down
and leaving passengers; passengers were getting into a state of
excitement about baggage which had not arrived and threatened to be too
late; big trunks and cases were being bumped down and dragged about;
sailors were uncoiling ropes and hurrying to and fro; officers were
giving orders; ladies and gentlemen and children and nurses were coming
on board--some were laughing and looked gay, some were silent and sad,
here and there two or three were crying and touching their eyes with
their handkerchiefs. Cedric found something to interest him on every
side; he looked at the piles of rope, at the furled sails, at the tall,
tall masts which seemed almost to touch the hot blue sky; he began to
make plans for conversing with the sailors and gaining some information
on the subject of pirates.

It was just at the very last, when he was leaning on the railing of the
upper deck and watching the final preparations, that his attention was
called to a slight bustle in one of the groups not far from him. Some
one was hurriedly forcing his way through this group and coming toward
him. It was a boy, with something red in his hand. It was Dick. He came
up to Cedric quite breathless.

"I've run all the way," he said. "I've come down to see ye off. Trade's
been prime! I bought this for ye out o' what I made yesterday. Ye kin
wear it when ye get among the swells. It's a hankercher."

He poured it all forth as if in one sentence. A bell rang and he made a
leap away before Cedric had time to speak.

"Good-bye!" he panted. "Wear it when ye get among the swells." And he
darted off and was gone.

Cedric held the handkerchief in his hand. It was of bright red silk,
ornamented with purple horse-shoes and horses' heads, he leaned forward
and waved it.

"Good-bye, Dick!" he shouted, lustily. "Thank you! Good-bye, Dick!"

And the big steamer moved away, and the people cheered again, and
Cedric's mother drew the veil over her eyes, and on the shore there was
left great confusion; but Dick saw nothing save that bright, childish
face and the bright hair that the sun shone on and the breeze lifted,
and he heard nothing but the hearty childish voice calling "Good-bye,
Dick!" as little Lord Fauntleroy steamed slowly away from the home of
his birth to the unknown land of his ancestors.




                             CHAPTER IV.
                             IN ENGLAND.


It was during the voyage that Cedric's mother told him that his home was
not to be hers; and when he first understood it, his grief was so great
that Mr. Havisham saw that the Earl had been wise in making the
arrangements that his mother should be quite near him, and see him
often; for it was very plain he could not have borne the separation
otherwise. But his mother managed the little fellow so sweetly and
lovingly, and made him feel that she would be so near him, that, after a
while, he ceased to be oppressed by the fear of any real parting.

"My house is not far from the Castle, Ceddie," she repeated each time
the subject was referred to--"a very little way from yours, and you can
always run in and see me every day, and you will have so many things to
tell me! and we shall be so happy together! It is a beautiful place.
Your papa has often told me about it. He loved it very much; and you
will love it too."

"I should love it better if you were there," his small lordship said,
with a heavy little sigh.

He could not but feel puzzled by so strange a state of affairs, which
could put his "Dearest" in one house and himself in another.

The fact was that Mrs. Errol had thought it better not to tell him why
this plan had been made.

"I should prefer he should not be told," she said to Mr. Havisham. "He
would not really understand; he would only be shocked and hurt; and I
feel sure that his feeling for the Earl will be a more natural and
affectionate one if he does not know that his grandfather dislikes me so
bitterly. It would make a barrier between them, even though Ceddie is
such a child."

So Cedric only knew that there was some mysterious reason for the
arrangement, some reason which he was not old enough to understand, but
which would be explained when he was older. He was puzzled; but after
many talks with his mother, in which she placed before him the bright
side of the picture, the dark side of it gradually began to fade out,
though now and then Mr. Havisham saw him sitting in some queer little
old-fashioned attitude, watching the sea, with a very grave face, and
more than once he heard an unchildish sigh rise to his lips.

The people who had been sea-sick had no sooner recovered from their
sea-sickness, and come on deck to recline in their steamer-chairs and
enjoy themselves, than every one seemed to know the romantic story of
Little Lord Fauntleroy, and every one took an interest in the little
fellow, who ran about the ship or walked with his mother or the tall,
thin old lawyer, or talked to the sailors. Every one liked him, he made
friends everywhere. He was ever ready to make friends. When the
gentlemen walked up and down the deck, and let him walk with them, he
stepped out with a manly, sturdy little tramp, and answered all their
jokes with much gay enjoyment; when the ladies talked to him, there was
always laughter in the group of which he was the centre; when he played
with the children, there was always magnificent fun on hand. Among the
sailors he had the heartiest friends; he heard miraculous stories about
pirates and shipwrecks and desert islands; he learned to splice ropes
and rig toy ships, and gained an amount of information concerning
"tops'les" and "mains'les," quite surprising. His conversation had,
indeed, quite a nautical flavour at times.

It was eleven days after he had said good-bye to his friend Dick before
he reached Liverpool; and it was on the night of the twelfth day that
the carriage, in which he and his mother and Mr. Havisham had driven
from the station, stopped before the gates of Court Lodge.

Mary had come with them to attend her mistress, and she had reached the
house before them. When Cedric jumped out of the carriage Mary stood in
the doorway.

Lord Fauntleroy sprang at her with a gay little shout.

"Did you get here, Mary?" he said. "Here's Mary, Dearest."

"I am glad you are here, Mary," Mrs. Errol said to her in a low voice.
"It is such a comfort to me to see you. It takes the strangeness away."
And she held out her little hand, which Mary squeezed encouragingly.

The English servants looked with curiosity at both the boy and his
mother. They had heard all sorts of rumours about them both; they knew
why Mrs. Errol was to live at the lodge and her little boy at the
Castle; but they did not know what sort of a little lord had come among
them; they did not quite understand the character of the next Earl of
Dorincourt.

He pulled off his overcoat quite as if he were used to doing things for
himself, and began to look about him. He looked about the broad hall, at
the pictures and stags' antlers and curious things that ornamented it.
They seemed curious to him because he had never seen such things before
in a private house.

"Dearest," he said, "this is a very pretty house, isn't it? I am glad
you are going to live here. It's quite a large house."

It was quite a large house compared to the one in the shabby New York
street, and it was very pretty and cheerful.

Mary led them into a big bright room; its ceiling was low, and the
furniture was heavy and beautifully carved. There was a great tiger-skin
before the fire, and an arm-chair on each side of it. A stately white
cat had responded to Lord Fauntleroy's stroking and followed him down
stairs, and when he threw himself down upon the rug, she curled herself
up grandly beside him as if she intended to make friends. Cedric was so
pleased that he put his head down by hers, and lay stroking her, not
noticing what his mother and Mr. Havisham were saying.

They were, indeed, speaking in a rather low tone. Mrs. Errol looked a
little pale and agitated.

"He need not go to-night?" she said. "He will stay with me to-night?"

"Yes," answered Mr. Havisham in the same low tone; "it will not be
necessary for him to go to-night. I myself will go to the Castle as soon
as we have dined, and inform the Earl of our arrival."

Mrs. Errol smiled faintly.

"His lordship does not know all that he is taking from me," she said
rather sadly. Then she looked at the lawyer. "Will you tell him, if you
please," she said, "that I should rather not have the income he proposed
to settle upon me. I am obliged to accept the house, and I thank him for
it, because it makes it possible for me to be near my child; but I have
a little money of my own and I should rather not take the other. As he
dislikes me so much, I should feel a little as if I were selling Cedric
to him. I am giving him up only because I love him enough to forget
myself for his good, and because his father would wish it to be so."

Mr. Havisham rubbed his chin.

"This is very strange," he said. "He will be very angry. He won't
understand it, but I will deliver your message."

And then the dinner was brought in and they sat down together, the big
cat taking a seat on a chair near Cedric's and purring majestically
throughout the meal.

When, later in the evening, Mr. Havisham presented himself at the
Castle, he was taken at once to the Earl. He found him sitting by the
fire in a luxurious easy-chair, his foot on a gout-stool. He looked at
the lawyer sharply from under his shaggy eyebrows.

"Well," he said; "well, Havisham, come back, have you? What's the news?"

"Lord Fauntleroy and his mother are at Court Lodge," replied Mr.
Havisham. "They bore the voyage very well and are in excellent health."

The Earl made a half-impatient sound and moved his hand restlessly.

"Glad to hear it," he said brusquely. "So far, so good. Make yourself
comfortable. Have a glass of wine and settle down. What else?"

"His lordship remains with his mother to-night. To-morrow I will bring
him to the Castle."

The Earl's elbow was resting on the arm of his chair; he put his hand up
and shielded his eyes with it.

"Well?" he said; "go on. What kind of a lad is he? I don't care about
the mother; what sort of a lad is he? Healthy and well grown?"

"Apparently very healthy, and quite well grown," replied the lawyer.

"Straight-limbed and well enough to look at?" demanded the Earl.

A very slight smile touched Mr. Havisham's thin lips.

"Rather a handsome boy, I think, my lord, as boys go," he said, "though
I am scarcely a judge, perhaps."

There was a silence of a few moments. It was Mr. Havisham who broke it.

"I have a message to deliver from Mrs. Errol," he remarked.

"I don't want any of her messages!" growled his lordship; "the less I
hear of her the better."

"This is a rather important one," explained the lawyer. "She prefers not
to accept the income you proposed to settle on her."

The Earl started visibly.

"What's that?" he cried out. "What's that?"

Mr. Havisham repeated his words.

"She says it is not necessary, and that as the relations between you are
not friendly----"

"Not friendly!" ejaculated my lord savagely; "I should say they were not
friendly! I hate to think of her! A mercenary American! I don't wish to
see her!"

"My lord," said Mr. Havisham, "you can scarcely call her mercenary. She
has asked for nothing. She does not accept the money you offer her."

"All done for effect!" snapped his noble lordship. "She thinks I shall
admire her spirit. I don't admire it! It's only American independence! I
won't have her living like a beggar at my park gates. She shall have the
money, whether she likes it or not!"

"She won't spend it," said Mr. Havisham.

"I don't care whether she spends it or not!" blustered my lord. "She
shall have it sent to her. She wants to give the boy a bad opinion of
me! I suppose she has poisoned his mind against me already!"

"No," said Mr. Havisham. "I have another message, which will prove to
you that she has not done that."

"I don't want to hear it!" panted the Earl, out of breath with anger and
excitement and gout.

But Mr. Havisham delivered it.

"She asks you not to let Lord Fauntleroy hear anything which would lead
him to understand that you separate him from her because of your
prejudice against her. He is very fond of her, and she is convinced that
it would cause a barrier to exist between you. She has told him that he
is too young to understand the reason, but shall hear it when he is
older. She wishes that there should be no shadow on your first meeting."

The Earl sank back into his chair. His deep-set fierce old eyes gleamed
under his beetling brows.

"Come, now!" he said, still breathlessly. "Come, now! You don't mean the
mother hasn't told him?"

"Not one word, my lord," replied the lawyer coolly. "That I can assure
you. The child is prepared to believe you the most amiable and
affectionate of grandparents. And as I carried out your commands in
every detail, while in New York, he certainly regards you as a wonder of
generosity."

"He does, eh?" said the Earl.

"I give you my word of honour," said Mr. Havisham, "that Lord
Fauntleroy's impressions of you will depend entirely upon yourself. And
if you will pardon the liberty I take in making the suggestion, I think
you will succeed better with him if you take the precaution not to speak
slightingly of his mother."

"Pooh, pooh!" said the Earl. "The youngster's only seven years old!"

"He has spent those seven years at his mother's side," returned Mr.
Havisham; "and she has all his affection."




                              CHAPTER V.
                            AT THE CASTLE.


It was late in the afternoon when the carriage containing little Lord
Fauntleroy and Mr. Havisham drove up the long avenue which led to the
castle. The Earl had given orders that his grandson should arrive in
time to dine with him, and for some reason best known to himself, he had
also ordered that the child should be sent alone into the room in which
he intended to receive him. As the carriage rolled up the avenue, Lord
Fauntleroy sat leaning comfortably against the luxurious cushions, and
regarded the prospect with great interest. He was, in fact, interested
in everything he saw. He had been interested in the carriage, with its
large, splendid horses and their glittering harness; he had been
interested in the tall coachman and footman, with their resplendent
livery; and he had been especially interested in the coronet on the
panels, and had struck up an acquaintance with the footman for the
purpose of inquiring what it meant.

The carriage rolled on and on between the great, beautiful trees which
grew on each side of the avenue and stretched their broad swaying
branches in an arch across it. Cedric had never seen such trees, they
were so grand and stately, and their branches grew so low down on their
huge trunks. He did not then know that Dorincourt Castle was one of the
most beautiful in all England; that its park was one of the broadest and
finest, and its trees and avenue almost without rivals. But he did know
that it was all very beautiful. Now and then they passed places where
tall ferns grew in masses, and again and again the ground was azure with
the bluebells swaying in the soft breeze. Several times he started up
with a laugh of delight as a rabbit leaped up from under the greenery
and scudded away with a twinkle of short white tail behind it. Once a
covey of partridges rose with a sudden whir and flew away, and then he
shouted and clapped his hands.

"It's a beautiful place, isn't it?" he said to Mr. Havisham. "I never
saw such a beautiful place. It's prettier even than Central Park."

He was rather puzzled by the length of time they were on their way.

"How far is it?" he said, at length, "from the gate to the front door?"

"It is between three and four miles," answered the lawyer.

It was not long after this that they saw the castle. It rose up before
them stately and beautiful and grey, the last rays of the sun casting
dazzling lights on its many windows. It had turrets and battlements and
towers; a great deal of ivy grew upon its walls; all the broad open
space about it was laid out in terraces and lawns and beds of brilliant
flowers.

"It's the most beautiful place I ever saw!" said Cedric, his round face
flushing with pleasure. "It reminds any one of a king's palace. I saw a
picture of one once in a fairy-book."

He saw the great entrance-door thrown open and many servants standing in
two lines looking at him. He wondered why they were standing there, and
admired their liveries very much. He did not know that they were there
to do honour to the little boy to whom all this splendour would one day
belong. At the head of the line of servants there stood an elderly woman
in a rich plain black silk gown; she had grey hair and wore a cap. As he
entered the hall she stood nearer than the rest, and the child thought
from the look in her eyes that she was going to speak to him. Mr.
Havisham, who held his hand, paused a moment.

"This is Lord Fauntleroy, Mrs. Mellon," he said. "Lord Fauntleroy, this
is Mrs. Mellon, who is the housekeeper."

Cedric gave her his hand, his eyes lighting up.

"Was it you who sent the cat?" he said. "I'm much obliged to you,
ma'am."

Mrs. Mellon's handsome old face looked very much pleased.

"The cat left two beautiful kittens here," she said; "they shall be sent
up to your lordship's nursery."

Mr. Havisham said a few words to her in a low voice.

"In the library, sir," Mrs. Mellon replied. "His lordship is to be taken
there alone."

                   *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later, the very tall footman in livery, who had escorted
Cedric to the library door, opened it and announced: "Lord Fauntleroy,
my Lord," in quite a majestic tone.

Cedric crossed the threshold into the room. It was a very large and
splendid room, with massive carven furniture in it, and shelves upon
shelves of books; the furniture was so dark, and the draperies so heavy,
the diamond-paned windows were so deep, and it seemed such a distance
from one end of it to the other, that, since the sun had gone down, the
effect of it all was rather gloomy. For a moment Cedric thought there
was nobody in the room, but soon he saw that by the fire burning on the
wide hearth there was a large easy-chair, and that in that chair some
one was sitting--some one who did not at first turn to look at him.

But he had attracted attention in one quarter at least. On the floor, by
the arm-chair, lay a dog, a huge tawny mastiff, with body and limbs
almost as big as a lion's; and this great creature rose majestically and
slowly, and marched toward the little fellow with a heavy step.

Then the person in the chair spoke. "Dougal," he called, "come back,
sir."

But there was no fear in little Lord Fauntleroy's heart. He put his hand
on the big dog's collar and they strayed forward together, Dougal
sniffing as he went.

And then the Earl looked up. What Cedric saw was a large old man with
shaggy white hair and eyebrows, and a nose like an eagle's beak between
his deep fierce eyes. What the Earl saw was a graceful childish figure
in a black velvet suit, with a lace collar, and with love-locks waving
about the handsome, manly little face, whose eyes met his with a look of
innocent good-fellowship. There was a sudden glow of triumph and
exultation in the fiery old Earl's heart as he saw what a strong
beautiful boy this grandson was, and how unhesitatingly he looked up as
he stood with his hand on the big dog's neck.

Cedric came quite close to him.

"Are you the Earl?" he said. "I'm your grandson, you know, that Mr.
Havisham brought. I'm Lord Fauntleroy."

He held out his hand because he thought it must be the polite and proper
thing to do even with earls. "I hope you are very well," he continued,
with the utmost friendliness. "I'm very glad to see you."

The Earl shook hands with him, with a curious gleam in his eyes.

"Glad to see me, are you?" he said.

"Yes," answered Lord Fauntleroy, "very."

There was a chair near him, and he sat down on it; it was a high-backed,
rather tall chair, and his feet did not touch the floor when he had
settled himself in it, but he seemed to be quite comfortable as he sat
there and regarded his august relative intently and modestly.

"Any boy would love his grandfather," continued he, "especially one that
had been as kind to him as you have been."

Another queer gleam came into the old nobleman's eyes.

"Oh!" he said, "I have been kind to you, have I?"

"Yes," answered Lord Fauntleroy brightly; "I'm ever so much obliged to
you about Bridget, and the apple-woman, and Dick!"

"Bridget!" exclaimed the Earl. "Dick! The apple-woman!"

"Yes," explained Cedric; "the ones you gave me all that money for--the
money you told Mr. Havisham to give me if I wanted it."

"Ha!" ejaculated his lordship. "That's it, is it? The money you were to
spend as you liked. What did you buy with it? I should like to hear
something about that."

He drew his shaggy eyebrows together and looked at the child sharply. He
was secretly curious to know in what way the lad had indulged himself.

"Oh!" said Lord Fauntleroy, "perhaps you didn't know about Dick, and the
apple-woman and Bridget. I forgot you lived such a long way off from
them. They were particular friends of mine. And you see Michael had the
fever----"

"Who's Michael?" asked the Earl.

"Michael is Bridget's husband, and they were in great trouble. And
Bridget used to come to our house and cry. And the evening Mr. Havisham
was there, she was in the kitchen crying because they had almost nothing
to eat and couldn't pay the rent; and I went in to see her, and Mr.
Havisham sent for me and he said you had given him some money for me.
And I ran as fast as I could into the kitchen and gave it to Bridget;
and that made it all right; and Bridget could scarcely believe her eyes.
That's why I'm so obliged to you."

"Oh!" said the Earl in his deep voice, "that was one of the things you
did for yourself, was it? What else?"

"Well, there was Dick," Cedric answered. "You'd like Dick, he's so
square."

This was an Americanism the Earl was not prepared for.

"What does that mean?" he inquired.

Lord Fauntleroy paused a moment to reflect. He was not very sure himself
what it meant.

"I think it means that he wouldn't cheat any one," he exclaimed; "or hit
a boy who was under his size, and that he blacks people's boots very
well and makes them shine as much as he can. He's a professional
boot-black."

"And he's one of your acquaintances, is he?" said the Earl.

"He's an old friend of mine," replied his grandson. "Not quite as old as
Mr. Hobbs, but quite old. He gave me a present just before the ship
sailed."

He put his hand into his pocket and drew forth a neatly folded red
object and opened it with an air of affectionate pride. It was the red
silk handkerchief with the large purple horse-shoes and heads on it.

"He gave me this," said his young lordship. "I shall keep it always. You
can wear it round your neck or keep it in your pocket. It's a keepsake.
I put some poetry in Mr. Hobbs' watch. It was, 'When this you see,
remember me.' When this I see, I shall always remember Dick."

The sensation of the Right Honourable the Earl of Dorincourt could
scarcely be described.

He could not help seeing that the little boy took him for a friend and
treated him as one, without having any doubt of him at all. It was quite
plain as the little fellow sat there in his tall chair and talked in his
friendly way that it had never occurred to him that this large,
fierce-looking old man could be anything but kind to him, and rather
pleased to see him there. And it was plain, too, that, in his childish
way, he wished to please and interest his grandfather. Cross, and
hard-hearted, and worldly as the old Earl was, he could not help feeling
a secret and novel pleasure in this very confidence.

So the old man leaned back in his chair, and led his young companion on
to telling him still more of himself, and with that odd gleam in his
eyes watched the little fellow as he talked. Lord Fauntleroy was quite
willing to answer all his questions and chatted on in his genial little
way quite composedly. He told him all about Dick, and the apple-woman,
and Mr. Hobbs. In the course of the conversation, he reached the Fourth
of July and the Revolution, and was just becoming enthusiastic, when
dinner was announced.

Cedric left his chair and went to his noble kinsman. He looked down at
his gouty foot.

"Would you like me to help you?" he said politely. "You could lean on
me, you know. Once when Mr. Hobbs hurt his foot with a potato-barrel
rolling on it, he used to lean on me."

The Earl looked his valiant young relative over from head to foot.

"Do you think you could do it?" he asked gruffly.

"I _think_ I could," said Cedric. "I'm strong. I'm seven, you know. You
could lean on your stick on one side, and on me on the other."

"Well," said the Earl, "you may try."

Cedric gave him his stick, and began to assist him to rise. Usually the
footman did this, and was violently sworn at when his lordship had an
extra twinge of gout.

But this evening he did not swear, though his gouty foot gave him more
twinges than one. He chose to try an experiment. He got up slowly and
put his hand on the small shoulder presented to him with so much
courage. Little Lord Fauntleroy made a careful step forward, looking
down at the gouty foot.

"Just lean on me," he said, with encouraging good cheer. "I'll walk very
slowly."

If the Earl had been supported by the footman he would have rested less
on his stick and more on his assistant's arm. And yet it was part of his
experiment to let his grandson feel his burden as no light weight. It
was quite a heavy weight indeed, and after a few steps his young
lordship's face grew quite hot, and his heart beat rather fast, but he
braced himself sturdily.

"Don't be afraid of leaning on me," he panted. "I'm all right--if--if it
isn't a very long way."

It was not really very far to the dining-room, but it seemed rather a
long way to Cedric, before they reached the chair at the head of the
table.

When the hand was removed from his shoulder, and the Earl was fairly
seated, Cedric took out Dick's handkerchief and wiped his forehead.

"It's a warm night, isn't it?" he said.

"You have been doing some rather hard work," said the Earl.

"Oh, no!" said Lord Fauntleroy, "it wasn't exactly hard, but I got a
little warm. A person will get warm in summer time."

And he rubbed his damp curls rather vigorously with the gorgeous
handkerchief. His own chair was placed at the other end of the table,
opposite his grandfather's. It was a chair with arms, and intended for a
much larger individual than himself; indeed, everything he had seen so
far--the great rooms, with their high ceilings, the massive furniture,
the big footman, the big dog, the Earl himself--were all of proportions
calculated to make this little lad feel that he was very small indeed.
But that did not trouble him.

Notwithstanding his solitary existence the Earl chose to live in
considerable state. He was fond of his dinner, and he dined in a formal
style. Cedric looked at him across a glitter of splendid glass and
plate, which to his unaccustomed eyes seemed quite dazzling. A stranger
looking on might well have smiled at the picture--the great stately
room, the big liveried servants, the bright lights, the glittering
silver and glass, the fierce-looking old nobleman at the head of the
table and the very small boy at the foot. Dinner was usually a very
serious matter with the Earl--and it was a very serious matter with the
cook, if his lordship was not pleased or had an indifferent appetite.
To-day, however, his appetite seemed a trifle better than usual, perhaps
because his grandson gave him something to think of. He kept looking at
him across the table. He did not say very much himself, but he managed
to make the boy talk. He had never imagined that he could be entertained
by hearing a child talk, but Lord Fauntleroy at once puzzled and amused
him.

Cedric finished his dinner first, and then he leaned back in his chair
and took a survey of the room.

"You must be very proud of your house," he said, "it's such a beautiful
house. I never saw anything so beautiful; but, of course, as I'm only
seven, I haven't seen much."

"And you think I must be proud of it, do you?" said the Earl.

"I should think any one would be proud of it," replied Lord Fauntleroy.
"I should be proud of it, if it were my house. Everything about it is
beautiful."

Then he paused an instant and looked across the table rather wistfully.

"It's a very big house for just two people to live in, isn't it?" he
said.

"It is quite large enough for two," answered the Earl. "Do you find it
too large?"

His little lordship hesitated a moment.

"I was only thinking," he said, "that if two people lived in it who were
not very good companions, they might feel lonely sometimes."

"Do you think I shall make a good companion?" inquired the Earl.

"Yes," replied Cedric, "I think you will. Mr. Hobbs and I were great
friends. He was the best friend I had except Dearest."

The Earl made a quick movement of his bushy eyebrows.

"Who is Dearest?"

"She is my mother," said Lord Fauntleroy, in a rather low, quiet little
voice.

Perhaps he was a trifle tired, as his bed-time was nearing, and perhaps
the feeling of weariness brought to him a vague sense of loneliness in
the remembrance that to-night he was not to sleep at home, watched over
by the loving eyes of that "best friend" of his. They had always been
"best friends," this boy and his young mother. He could not help
thinking of her, and the more he thought of her the less was he inclined
to talk, and by the time the dinner was at an end the Earl saw that
there was a faint shadow on his face. But Cedric bore himself with
excellent courage, and when they went back to the library, though the
tall footman walked on one side of his master, the Earl's hand rested on
his grandson's shoulder, though not so heavily as before.

When the footman left them alone, Cedric sat down upon the hearth-rug
near Dougal. For a few minutes he stroked the dog's ears in silence and
looked at the fire.

The Earl watched him. The boy's eyes looked wistful and thoughtful, and
once or twice he gave a little sigh. The Earl sat still, and kept his
eyes fixed on his grandson.

"Fauntleroy," he said at last, "what are you thinking of?"

Fauntleroy looked up with a manful effort at a smile.

"I was thinking about Dearest," he said; "and--and I think I'd better
get up and walk up and down the room."

He rose up, and put his hands in his small pockets, and began to walk to
and fro. His eyes were very bright, and his lips were pressed together,
but he kept his head up and walked firmly. Dougal moved lazily and
looked at him and then stood up. He walked over to the child, and began
to follow him uneasily. Fauntleroy drew one hand from his pocket and
laid it on the dog's head.

"He's a very nice dog," he said. "He's my friend. He knows how I feel."

"How do you feel?" asked the Earl.

"I never was away from my own house before," said the boy, with a
troubled look in his brown eyes. "It makes a person feel a strange
feeling when he has to stay all night in another person's castle instead
of in his own house. But Dearest is not very far away from me. She told
me to remember that--and--and I'm seven--and I can look at the picture
she gave me."

He put his hand in his pocket, and brought out a small violet
velvet-covered case.

"This is it," he said. "You see, you press this spring and it opens, and
she is in there!"

He had come close to the Earl's chair, and, as he drew forth the little
case, he leaned against the old man's arm.

"There she is," he said, as the case opened; and he looked up with a
smile.

The Earl knitted his brows; he did not wish to see the picture, but he
looked at it in spite of himself; and there looked up at him from it
such a pretty young face--a face so like the child's at his side--that
it quite startled him.

"I suppose you think you are very fond of her?" he said.

"Yes," answered Lord Fauntleroy, in a gentle tone, and with simple
directness; "I do think so, and I think it's true. You see Mr. Hobbs was
my friend, and Dick and Bridget and Michael they were my friends too;
but Dearest--well she is my _close_ friend, and we always tell each
other everything."

His young lordship slipped down upon the hearth-rug, and sat there with
the picture still in his hand.

The Earl did not speak again. He leaned back in his chair and watched
him. A great many strange new thoughts passed through the old nobleman's
mind. Dougal had stretched himself out and gone to sleep with his head
on his huge paws. There was a long silence.

                   *       *       *       *       *

In about half an hour's time Mr. Havisham was ushered in. The great room
was very still when he entered. The Earl was still leaning back in his
chair. He moved as Mr. Havisham approached, and held up his hand in a
gesture of warning--it seemed as if he had scarcely intended to make the
gesture--as if it were almost involuntary. Dougal was still asleep, and
close beside the great dog, sleeping also, with his curly head upon his
arm, lay little Lord Fauntleroy.




                             CHAPTER VI.
                      THE EARL AND HIS GRANDSON.


When Lord Fauntleroy wakened in the morning--he had not wakened at all
when he had been carried to bed the night before,--the first sound he
was conscious of were the crackling of a wood fire and the murmur of
voices.

He moved on his pillow, and turned over, opening his eyes.

There were two women in the room. Everything was bright and cheerful
with gay-flowered chintz. There was a fire on the hearth, and the
sunshine was streaming in through the ivy-entwined windows. Both women
came toward him, and he saw that one of them was Mrs. Mellon, the
housekeeper, and the other a comfortable, middle-aged woman, with a face
as kind and good-humoured as a face could be.

"Good-morning, my lord," said Mrs. Mellon. "Did you sleep well?"

His lordship rubbed his eyes and smiled.

"Good-morning," he said. "I didn't know I was here."

"You were carried up-stairs when you were asleep," said the housekeeper.
"This is your bedroom, and this is Dawson, who is to take care of you."

Fauntleroy sat up in bed and held out his hand to Dawson, as he had held
it out to the Earl.

"How do you do, ma'am?" he said. "I'm much obliged to you for coming to
take care of me."

"You can call her Dawson, my lord," said the housekeeper with a smile.
"She is used to being called Dawson.--She will do anything you ask her
to."

"That I will, bless him," said Dawson, in her comforting, good-humoured
voice. "He shall dress himself, and I'll stand by, ready to help him if
he wants me."

"Thank you," responded Lord Fauntleroy; "it's a little hard sometimes
about the buttons, you know, and then I have to ask somebody."

When he went into the adjoining room to take his breakfast and saw what
a great room it was, and found there was another adjoining it, which
Dawson told him was his also, the feeling that he was very small indeed
came over him again so strongly that he confided it to Dawson, as he sat
down to the table on which the pretty breakfast service was arranged.

"I am a very little boy," he said rather wistfully, "to live in such a
large castle, and have so many big rooms--don't you think so?"

"Oh, come!" said Dawson, "you feel just a little strange at first,
that's all; but you'll get over that very soon, and then you'll like it
here. It's such a beautiful place, you know."

"It's a very beautiful place, of course," said Fauntleroy, with a little
sigh; "but I should like it better if I didn't miss Dearest so. I always
had my breakfast with her in the morning, and put the sugar and cream in
her tea for her, and handed her the toast. That made it very sociable,
of course."

"Oh, well!" answered Dawson, comfortably, "you know you can see her
every day, and there's no knowing how much you'll have to tell her.
Bless you! wait till you've walked about a bit and seen things--the dogs
and the stables with all the horses in them. And, dear me, you haven't
looked even into the very next room yet!"

"What is there?" asked Fauntleroy,

"Wait until you've had your breakfast, and then you shall see," said
Dawson.

At this he naturally began to grow curious, and he applied himself
assiduously to his breakfast.

"Now then," he said, slipping off his seat a few minutes later; "I've
had enough. Can I go and look at it?"

Dawson nodded and led the way.

When she opened the door of the room, he stood upon the threshold and
looked about him in amazement. He did not speak; he only put his hands
in his pockets and stood there looking in.

The room was a large one too, as all the rooms seemed to be, and it
appeared to him more beautiful than the rest, only in a different way.
The furniture was not so massive and antique as was that in the rooms he
had seen down stairs; the draperies and rugs and walls were brighter;
there were shelves full of books, and on the tables were numbers of
toys--beautiful, ingenious things--such as he had looked at with wonder
and delight through the shop windows in New York.

"It looks like a boy's room," he said at last, catching his breath a
little. "Who do they belong to?"

"Go and look at them," said Dawson. "They belong to you!"

"To me!" he cried "to me! Why do they belong to me? Who gave them to
me?" And he sprang forward with a gay little shout. It seemed almost too
much to be believed. "It was Grandpapa!" he said, with his eyes as
bright as stars. "I know it was Grandpapa!"

"Yes, it was his lordship," said Dawson.

It was a tremendously exciting morning. There were so many things to be
examined, so many experiments to be tried; each novelty was so absorbing
that he could scarcely turn from it to look at the next.

The Earl had passed a bad night and had spent the morning in his room;
but at noon, after he had lunched, he sent for his grandson.

Fauntleroy answered the summons at once. He came down the broad
staircase with a bounding step; the Earl heard him run across the hall,
and then the door opened and he came in with red cheeks and sparkling
eyes.

"I was waiting for you to send for me," he said. "I was ready a long
time ago. I'm _ever_ so much obliged to you for all those things! I'm
_ever_ so much obliged to you! I have been playing with them all the
morning."

"Oh!" said the Earl, "you like them, do you?"

"I like them so much--well, I couldn't tell you how much!" said
Fauntleroy, his face glowing with delight. "There's one that's like
base-ball. I tried to teach Dawson, but she couldn't quite understand it
just at first. But you know all about it, don't you?"

"I'm afraid I don't," replied the Earl. "It's an American game, isn't
it? Is it something like cricket?"

"I never saw cricket," said Fauntleroy; "but Mr. Hobbs took me several
times to see base-ball. It's a splendid game. You get so excited! Would
you like me to go and get my game and show it to you? Perhaps it would
amuse you and make you forget about your foot. Does your foot hurt you
very much this morning?"

"More than I enjoy," was the answer.

"Then perhaps you couldn't forget it," said the little fellow,
anxiously. "Perhaps it would bother you to be told about the game. Do
you think it would amuse you, or do you think it would bother you?"

"Go and get it," said the Earl.

It certainly was a novel entertainment this--making a companion of a
child who offered to teach him to play games, but the very novelty of it
amused him. There was a smile lurking about the Earl's mouth when Cedric
came back with the box containing the game in his arms, and an
expression of the most eager interest on his face.

"May I pull that little table over here to your chair?" he asked.

"Ring for Thomas," said the Earl. "He will place it for you."

"Oh, I can do it myself," answered Fauntleroy. "It's not very heavy."

"Very well," replied his grandfather. The lurking smile deepened on the
old man's face as he watched the little fellow's preparations; there was
such an absorbed interest in them. The small table was dragged forward
and placed by his chair, and the game taken from its box and arranged
upon it.

"It's very interesting when you once begin," said Fauntleroy. "You see,
the black pegs can be your side and the white ones mine. They're men,
you know, and once round the field is a home run and counts one--and
these are the outs--and here is the first base and that's the second and
that's the third and that's the home-base."

He entered into the details of explanation with the greatest animation.
He showed all the attitudes of pitcher and catcher and batter in the
real game.

When at last the explanations and illustrations were at an end and the
game began in good earnest, the Earl still found himself entertained.
His young companion was wholly absorbed; he played with all his childish
heart; his gay little laughs when he made a good throw, his enthusiasm
over a "home run," his impartial delight over his own good luck or his
opponent's would have given a flavour to any game.

If, a week before, any one had told the Earl of Dorincourt that on that
particular morning he would be forgetting his gout and his bad temper in
a child's game, with a curly-headed small boy for a companion, he would
without doubt have made himself very unpleasant; and yet he certainly
had forgotten himself when the door opened and Thomas announced a
visitor.

The visitor in question, who was an elderly gentleman in black, and no
less a person than the clergyman of the parish, was so startled by the
amazing scene which met his eye, that he almost fell back a pace, and
ran some risk of colliding with Thomas.

There, was, in fact, no part of his duty that the Reverend Mr. Mordaunt
found so decidedly unpleasant as that part which compelled him to call
upon his noble patron at the Castle. His noble patron, indeed, usually
made these visits as disagreeable as it lay in his lordly power to make
them. He abhorred churches and charities, and flew into violent rages
when any of his tenantry took the liberty of being poor and ill and
needing assistance. During all the years in which Mr. Mordaunt had been
in charge of Dorincourt parish, the rector certainly did not remember
having seen his lordship, of his own free will, do any one a kindness,
or, under any circumstances whatever, show that he thought of any one
but himself.

Judge then of his amazement when, as Thomas opened the library door, his
ears were greeted by a delighted ring of childish laughter.

The Earl glanced around, and when he saw who it was, Mr. Mordaunt was
still more surprised to see that he looked almost as if he had forgotten
for the moment how unpleasant he really could make himself when he
tried.

"Ah!" he said in his harsh voice, but giving his hand rather graciously.
"Good morning, Mordaunt. I've found a new employment, you see."

He put his other hand on Cedric's shoulder--perhaps deep down in his
heart there was a stir of gratified pride that it was such an heir he
had to present; there was a spark of something like pleasure in his eyes
as he moved the boy slightly forward.

"This is the new Lord Fauntleroy," he said. "Fauntleroy, this is Mr.
Mordaunt, the rector of the parish."

Fauntleroy looked up at the gentleman in the clerical garments, and gave
him his hand.

"I am very glad to make your acquaintance, sir," he said.

Mr. Mordaunt held the small hand in his a moment as he looked down at
the child's face, smiling involuntarily, He liked the little fellow from
that instant--as in fact people always did like him.

"I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Lord Fauntleroy," said the
rector. "You made a long journey to come to us. A great many people will
be glad to know you made it safely."

"It _was_ a long way," answered Fauntleroy; "but Dearest, my mother, was
with me and I wasn't lonely. Of course you are never lonely if your
mother is with you; and the ship was beautiful."

"Take a chair, Mordaunt," said the Earl. Mr. Mordaunt sat down. He
glanced from Fauntleroy to the Earl.

"Your lordship is greatly to be congratulated," he said warmly. But the
Earl plainly had no intention of showing his feelings on the subject.

"He is like his father," he said rather gruffly. "Let us hope he'll
conduct himself more creditably." And then he added: "Well, what is it
this morning, Mordaunt? Who is in trouble now?"

This was not as bad as Mr. Mordaunt had expected, but he hesitated a
second before he began.

"It is Higgins," he said; "Higgins of Edge Farm. He has been very
unfortunate. He was ill himself last autumn, and his children had
scarlet fever. He is in trouble about his rent now. Newick tells him if
he doesn't pay it he must leave the place; and of course that would be a
very serious matter. His wife is ill, and he came to me yesterday to beg
me to see you about it, and ask you for time. He thinks if you would
give him time he could catch up again."

"They all think that," said the Earl, looking rather black.

Fauntleroy made a movement forward. He had been standing between his
grandfather and the visitor, listening with all his might. He had begun
to be interested in Higgins at once. He wondered how many children there
were, and if the scarlet fever had hurt them very much. His eyes were
wide open and were fixed upon Mr. Mordaunt with intense interest as that
gentleman went on with the conversation.

"Higgins is a well-meaning man," said the rector, making an effort to
strengthen his plea.

"He is a bad enough tenant," replied his lordship. "And he is always
behindhand, Newick tells me."

"He is in great trouble now," said the rector, "He is very fond of his
wife and children, and if the farm is taken from him they may literally
starve. He cannot give them the nourishing things they need. Two of the
children were left very low after the fever, and the doctor orders for
them wine and luxuries that Higgins cannot afford."

At this Fauntleroy moved a step nearer.

"That was the way with Michael," he said.

The Earl slightly started. "I forgot _you_!" he said. "I forgot we had a
philanthropist in the room. Who was Michael?" And the gleam of queer
amusement came back into the old man's deep-set eyes.

"He was Bridget's husband, who had the fever," answered Fauntleroy; "and
he couldn't pay the rent or buy wine and things. And you gave me that
money to help him."

The Earl drew his brows together into a curious frown, which somehow was
scarcely grim at all. He glanced across at Mr. Mordaunt.

"I don't know what sort of a landed proprietor he will make," he said.
"I told Havisham the boy was to have what he wanted--and what he wanted,
it seems, was money to give to beggars."

"Oh! but they weren't beggars," said Fauntleroy eagerly. "Michael was a
splendid bricklayer! They all worked."

"Oh!" said the Earl, "they were not beggars."

He bent his gaze on the boy for a few seconds in silence. "Come here,"
he said, at last.

"What would _you_ do in this case?"

It must be confessed that Mr. Mordaunt experienced for the moment a
curious sensation. Being a man of great thoughtfulness, and having spent
so many years on the estate of Dorincourt, he realised very strongly
what power for good or evil would be given in the future to this one
small boy standing there, his brown eyes wide open, his hands deep in
his pockets; and the thought came to him also that a great deal of power
might, perhaps, through the caprice of a proud, self-indulgent old man
be given to him now, and that if his young nature were not a simple and
generous one, it might be the worst thing that could happen, not only
for others, but for himself.

"And what would _you_ do in such a case?" demanded the Earl.

Fauntleroy drew a little nearer, and laid one hand on his knee, with the
most confiding air of good comradeship.

"If I were very rich," he said "and not only just a little boy, I should
let him stay, and give him the things for his children; but then, I am
only a boy." Then, after a second's pause, in which his face brightened
visibly, "_You_ can do anything, can't you?" he said.

"Humph!" said my lord, staring at him. "That's your opinion, is it?" And
he was not displeased either.

"I mean you can give any one anything," said Fauntleroy. "Who's Newick?"

"He is my agent," answered the Earl, "and some of my tenants are not
over-fond of him."

"Are you going to write him a letter now?" inquired Fauntleroy. "Shall I
bring you the pen and ink? I can take the game off this table."

It plainly had not for an instant occurred to him that Newick would be
allowed to do his worst.

The Earl paused a moment, still looking at him. "Can you write?" he
asked.

"Yes," answered Cedric, "but not very well."

"Move the things from the table," commanded my lord, "and bring the pen
and ink, and a sheet of paper from my desk."

Mr. Mordaunt's interest began to increase. Fauntleroy did as he was told
very deftly. In a few moments, the sheet of paper, the big inkstand, and
the pen were ready.

"There!" he said gaily, "now you can write it."

"You are to write it," said the Earl.

"I!" exclaimed Fauntleroy, and a flush overspread bis forehead. "Will it
do if I write it? I don't always spell quite right when I haven't a
dictionary and nobody tells me."

"It will do," answered the Earl. "Higgins will not complain of the
spelling. I'm not the philanthropist; you are. Dip your pen in the ink."

Fauntleroy took up the pen and dipped it in the ink-bottle, then he
arranged himself in position, leaning on the table.

"Now," he inquired, "what must I say?"

"You may say, 'Higgins is not to be interfered with, for the present,'
and sign it 'Fauntleroy,'" said the Earl.

Fauntleroy dipped his pen in the ink again, and resting his arm, began
to write. It was rather a slow and serious process, but he gave his
whole soul to it. After a while, however, the manuscript was complete,
and he handed it to his grandfather with a smile slightly tinged with
anxiety.

"Do you think it will do?" he asked.

The Earl looked at it, and the corners of his mouth twitched a little.

"Yes," he answered; "Higgins will find it entirely satisfactory." And he
handed it to Mr. Mordaunt.

What Mr. Mordaunt found written was this:--

   "Dear mr. Newik if you pleas mr. higins is not to be inturfeared
   with for the present and oblige

                                                    "Yours rispecferly
                                                         "Fauntleroy."

"Mr. Hobbs always signed his letters that way," said Fauntleroy; "and I
thought I'd better say 'please.' Is that exactly the right way to spell
'interfered'?"

"It's not exactly the way it is spelled in the dictionary," answered the
Earl.

"I was afraid of that," said Fauntleroy. "I ought to have asked. You
see, that's the way with words of more than one syllable; you have to
look in the dictionary. It's always safest. I'll write it over again."

And write it over again he did, making quite an imposing copy, and
taking precautions in the matter of spelling by consulting the Earl
himself.

"Spelling is a curious thing," he said. "It's so often different from
what you expect it to be. I used to think 'please' was spelled
p-l-e-e-s, but it isn't, you know; and you'd think 'dear' was spelled
d-e-r-e, if you didn't inquire. Sometimes it almost discourages you."

When Mr. Mordaunt went away, he took the letter with him, and he took
something else with him also--namely, a pleasanter feeling and a more
hopeful one than he had ever carried home with him down that avenue on
any previous visit he had made at Dorincourt Castle.

When he was gone, Fauntleroy, who had accompanied him to the door, went
back to his grandfather.

"May I go to Dearest now?" he said. "I think she will be waiting for
me."

The Earl was silent a moment.

"There is something in the stable for you to see first," he said. "Ring
the bell."

"If you please," said Fauntleroy, with his quick little flush, "I'm very
much obliged; but I think I'd better see it to-morrow. She will be
expecting me all the time."

"Very well," answered the Earl. "We will order the carriage." Then he
added dryly, "It's a pony."

Fauntleroy drew a long breath.

"A pony!" he exclaimed. "Whose pony is it?"

"Yours," replied the Earl.

"Mine?" cried the little fellow. "Mine--like the things up stairs?"

"Yes," said his grandfather. "Would you like to see it? Shall I order it
to be brought round?" Fauntleroy's cheeks grew redder and redder.

"I never thought I should have a pony!" he said. "I never thought that!
How glad Dearest will be. You give me _everything_, don't you?"

"Do you wish to see it?" inquired the Earl.

Fauntleroy drew a long breath. "I _want_ to see it," he said. "I want to
see it so much I can hardly wait. But I'm afraid there isn't time."

"You _must_ go and see your mother this afternoon?" asked the Earl. "You
think you can't put it off?"

"Why," said Fauntleroy, "she has been thinking about me all the morning,
and I have been thinking about her!"

"Oh!" said the Earl. "You have, have you? Ring the bell."

As they drove down the avenue, under the arching trees, he was rather
silent. But Fauntleroy was not. He talked about the pony. What colour
was it? How big was it? What was its name? What did it like to eat best?
How old was it? How early in the morning might he get up and see it?

"Dearest will be so glad!" he kept saying. "She will be so much obliged
to you for being so kind to me! She knows I always liked ponies so much,
but we never thought I should have one."

He leaned back against the cushions and regarded the Earl with rapt
interest for a few minutes and in entire silence.

"I think you must be the best person in the world," he burst forth at
last. "You are always doing good, aren't you?--and thinking about other
people. Dearest says that is the best kind of goodness; not to think
about yourself, but to think about other people. That is just the way
you are, isn't it?"

His lordship was so dumfounded to find himself presented in such
agreeable colours, that he did not know exactly what to say.

Fauntleroy went on, still regarding him with admiring eyes--those great,
clear, innocent eyes!

"You make so many people happy," he said. "There's Michael and Bridget
and their ten children, and the apple-woman, and Dick, and Mr. Hobbs,
and Mr. Higgins and Mrs. Higgins and their children, and Mr.
Mordaunt--because of course he was glad--and Dearest and me, about the
pony and all the other things. Do you know, I've counted it up on my
fingers and in my mind, and it's twenty-seven people you've been kind
to. That's a good many--twenty-seven!"

"And I was the person who was kind to them--was I?" said the Earl.

"Why, yes, you know," answered Fauntleroy. "You made them all happy. Do
you know," with some delicate hesitation, "that people are sometimes
mistaken about earls when they don't know them? Mr. Hobbs was. I am
going to write to him, and tell him about it."

"What was Mr. Hobbs's opinion of earls?" asked his lordship.

"Well, you see, the difficulty was," replied his young companion, "that
he didn't know any, and he'd only read about them in books. He
thought--you mustn't mind it--that they were gory tyrants; and he said
he wouldn't have them hanging around his store. But if he'd known _you_,
I'm sure he would have felt quite different. I shall tell him about
you."

"What shall you tell him?"

"I shall tell him," said Fauntleroy, glowing with enthusiasm, "that you
are the kindest man I ever heard of. And--and I hope when I grow up, I
shall be just like you."

"Just like me!" repeated his lordship, looking at the little kindling
face.

"_Just_ like you," said Fauntleroy, adding modestly, "if I can. Perhaps
I'm not good enough but I'm going to try."

The carriage rolled on down the stately avenue under the beautiful,
broad-branched trees, through the spaces of green shade and lanes of
golden sunlight. Fauntleroy saw again the lovely places where the ferns
grew high and the bluebells swayed in the breeze; he saw the deer,
standing or lying in the deep grass, turn their large startled eyes as
the carriage passed, and caught glimpses of the brown rabbits as they
scurried away. He heard the whirr of the partridges and the calls and
songs of the birds, and it all seemed even more beautiful to him than
before. All his heart was filled with pleasure and happiness in the
beauty that was on every side. But the old Earl saw and heard very
different things, though he was apparently looking out too. He saw a
long life, in which there had been neither generous deeds nor kind
thoughts; he saw years in which a man who had been young and strong and
rich and powerful had used his youth and strength and wealth and power
only to please himself and kill time as the days and years succeeded
each other; he saw this man, when the time had been killed and old age
had come, solitary and without real friends in the midst of all his
splendid wealth; he saw people who disliked or feared him, and people
who would flatter and cringe to him, but no one who really cared whether
he lived or died, unless they had something to gain or lose by it.

And the fact was, indeed, that he had never before condescended to
reflect upon it at all, and he only did so now because a child had
believed him better than he was.

Fauntleroy thought the Earl's foot must be hurting him, his brows
knitted themselves together so, as he looked out at the park; and
thinking this, the considerate little fellow tried not to disturb him,
and enjoyed the trees and the ferns and the deer in silence. But at
last, the carriage, having passed the gates and bowled through the green
lanes for a short distance, stopped. They had reached Court Lodge; and
Fauntleroy was out upon the ground almost before the big footman had
time to open the carriage door.

The Earl wakened from his reverie with a start.

"What!" he said. "Are we here?"

"Yes," said Fauntleroy. "Let me give you your stick. Just lean on me
when you get out."

"I am not going to get out," replied his lordship brusquely.

"Not--not to see Dearest?" exclaimed Fauntleroy with astonished face.

"'Dearest' will excuse me," said the Earl dryly. "Go to her and tell her
that not even a new pony would keep you away."

"She will be disappointed," said Fauntleroy. "She will want to see you
very much."

"I am afraid not," was the answer. "The carriage will call for you as we
come back.--Tell Jeffries to drive on, Thomas."

Thomas closed the carriage door: and, after a puzzled look, Fauntleroy
ran up the drive. The Earl had the opportunity--of seeing a pair of
handsome, strong little legs flash over the ground with astonishing
rapidity. Evidently their owner had no intention of losing any time. The
carriage rolled slowly away, but his lordship did not at once lean back;
he still looked out. Through a space in the trees he could see the house
door; it was wide open. The little figure dashed up the steps; another
figure--a little figure too, slender and young, in its black gown--ran
to meet it. It seemed as if they flew together, as Fauntleroy leaped
into his mother's arms, hanging about her neck and covering her sweet
young face with kisses.




                             CHAPTER VII.
                              AT CHURCH.


On the following Sunday morning, Mr. Mordaunt had a large congregation.
Indeed, he could scarcely remember any Sunday on which the church had
been so crowded. People appeared upon the scene who seldom did him the
honour of coming to hear his sermons. There were even people from
Hazelton, which was the next parish. There were hearty, sunburned
farmers, stout, comfortable, apple-cheeked wives in their best bonnets
and most gorgeous shawls, and half a dozen children or so to each
family. The doctor's wife was there, with her four daughters. Mrs.
Kimsey and Mr. Kimsey, who kept the druggist's shop, and made pills, and
did up powders for everybody within ten miles, sat in their pew; Mrs.
Dibble in hers, Miss Smiff, the village dressmaker, and her friend Miss
Perkins, the milliner, sat in theirs; the doctor's young man was
present, and the druggist's apprentice; in fact, almost every family on
the country side was represented, in one way or another.

In the course of the preceding week, many wonderful stories had been
told of little Lord Fauntleroy.

The Reverend Mr. Mordaunt had told the story of Higgins at his own
dinner table, and the servant who had heard it had told it in the
kitchen, and from there it had spread like wildfire.

And on market-day, when Higgins had appeared in town, he had been
questioned on every side, and Newick had been questioned too, and in
response had shown to two or three people the note signed "Fauntleroy."

And so the farmers' wives had found plenty to talk of over their tea and
their shopping, and they had done the subject full justice and made the
most of it. And on Sunday they had either walked to church or had been
driven in their gigs by their husbands, who were perhaps a trifle
curious themselves about the new little lord who was to be in time the
owner of the soil.

It was by no means the Earl's habit to attend church, but he chose to
appear on this first Sunday--it was his whim to present himself in the
huge family pew, with Fauntleroy at his side.

There were many loiterers in the churchyard that morning. There were
groups at the gates and in the porch, and there had been much discussion
as to whether my lord would really appear or not. When this discussion
was at its height, one good woman suddenly uttered an exclamation.

"Eh!" she said; "that must be the mother, pretty young thing."

All who heard turned and looked at the slender figure in black coming up
the path. The veil was thrown back from her face and they could see how
fair and sweet it was, and how the bright hair curled as softly as a
child's under the little widow's cap.

She was not thinking of the people about; she was thinking of Cedric,
and of his visits to her, and his joy over his new pony, on which he had
actually ridden to her door the day before, sitting very straight and
looking very proud and happy. But soon she could not help being
attracted by the fact that she was being looked at and that her arrival
had created some sort of sensation. She first noticed it because an old
woman in a red cloak made a bobbing curtsy to her, and then another did
the same thing and said, "God bless you, my lady!" and one man after
another took off his hat as she passed. For a moment she did not
understand, and then she realised that it was because she was little
Lord Fauntleroy's mother that they did so, and she flushed rather shyly,
and smiled and bowed too and said, "Thank you" in a gentle voice to the
old woman, who had blessed her. She had scarcely passed through the
stone porch into the church before the great event of the day happened.
The carriage from the Castle, with its handsome horses and tall liveried
servants, bowled round the corner and down the green lane.

"Here they come!" went from one looker-on to another.

And then the carriage drew up, and Thomas stepped down and opened the
door, and a little boy, dressed in black velvet, and with a splendid mop
of bright waving hair, jumped out.

Every man, woman, and child looked curiously upon him.

"He's the Captain over again!" said those of the on-lookers who
remembered his father. "He's the Captain's self, to the life!"

He stood there in the sunlight looking up at the Earl, as Thomas helped
that nobleman out, with the most affectionate interest that could be
imagined. The instant he could help, he put out his hand and offered his
shoulder as if he had been seven feet high. It was plain enough to every
one that however it might be with other people, the Earl of Dorincourt
struck no terror into the breast of his grandson.

"Just lean on me," they heard him say. "How glad the people are to see
you, and how well they all seem to know you!"

"Take off your cap, Fauntleroy," said the Earl. "They are bowing to
you."

"To me!" cried Fauntleroy, whipping off his cap in a moment, baring his
bright head to the crowd, and turning shining, puzzled eyes on them as
he tried to bow to every one at once.

"God bless your lordship!" said the curtsying, red-cloaked old woman who
had spoken to his mother; "long life to you!"

"Thank you, ma'am," said Fauntleroy. And then they went into the church,
and were looked at there, on their way up the aisle to the square
red-cushioned and curtained pew. When Fauntleroy was fairly seated he
made two discoveries which pleased him: the first was that, across the
church where he could look at her, his mother sat and smiled at him; the
second, that at one end of the pew against the wall knelt two quaint
figures carven in stone, facing each other as they kneeled on either
side of a pillar supporting two stone missals, their hands folded as if
in prayer, their dress very antique and strange. On the tablet by them
was written something of which he could only read the curious words:

"Here lyethe ye bodye of Gregorye Arthure Fyrst Earle of Dorincourt
allsoe of Alisone Hildegarde hys wyfe."

"May I whisper?" inquired his lordship, devoured by curiosity.

"What is it?" said his grandfather.

"Who are they?"

"Some of your ancestors," answered the Earl, "who lived a few hundred
years ago."

"Perhaps," said Lord Fauntleroy, regarding them with respect, "perhaps I
got my spelling from them." And then he proceeded to find his place in
the church service. When the music began, he stood up and looked across
at his mother, smiling. He was very fond of music, and his mother and he
often sang together, so he joined in with the rest, his pure, sweet,
high voice rising as clear as the song of a bird. He quite forgot
himself in his pleasure in it. The Earl forgot himself a little too, as
he sat in his curtain-shielded corner of the pew and watched the boy.
His mother, as she looked at him across the church, felt a thrill pass
through her heart, and a prayer rose in it too; a prayer that the pure,
simple happiness of his childish soul might last, and that the strange,
great fortune which had fallen to him might bring no wrong or evil with
it. There were many soft anxious thoughts in her tender heart in those
new days.

"Oh, Ceddie!" she had said to him the evening before, as she hung over
him in saying good-night, before he went away; "Oh, Ceddie, dear, I wish
for your sake I was very clever and could say a great many wise things!
But only be good, dear, only be brave, only be kind and true always, and
then you will never hurt any one so long as you live, and you may help
many, and the big world may be better because my little child was born."

And on his return to the Castle, Fauntleroy had repeated her words to
his grandfather.

"And I thought about you when she said that," he ended; "and I told her
that was the way the world was because you had lived, and I was going to
try if I could be like you."

"And what did she say to that?" asked his lordship, a trifle uneasily.

"She said that was right, and we must always look for good in people and
try to be like it."

Perhaps it was this the old man remembered as he glanced through the
divided folds of the red curtain of his pew to where his son's wife sat.

As they came out of the church, many of those who had attended the
service stood waiting to see them pass. As they neared the gate, a man
who stood with his hat in his hand made a step forward and then
hesitated. He was a middle-aged farmer, with a careworn face.

"Well, Higgins," said the Earl.

Fauntleroy turned quickly to look at him.

"Oh!" he exclaimed; "is it Mr. Higgins?"

"Yes," answered the Earl dryly; "and I suppose he came to take a look at
his new landlord."

"Yes, my lord," said the man, his sunburned face reddening. "Mr. Newick
told me his young lordship was kind enough to speak for me, and I
thought I'd like to say a word of thanks, if I might be allowed."

Perhaps he felt some wonder when he saw what a little fellow it was who
had innocently done so much for him, and who stood there looking up just
as one of his own less fortunate children might have done--apparently
not realising his own importance in the least.

"I've a great deal to thank your lordship for," he said; "a great deal.
I----"

"Oh," said Fauntleroy; "I only wrote the letter. It was my grandfather
who did it. But you know how he is about always being good to everybody.
Is Mrs. Higgins well now?"

Higgins looked a trifle taken aback. He also was somewhat startled at
hearing his noble landlord presented in the character of a benevolent
being, full of engaging qualities.

"I--well, yes, your lordship," he stammered.

"I'm glad of that," said Fauntleroy. "My grandfather was very sorry
about your children having the scarlet fever, and so was I."

"You see, Higgins," broke in the Earl with a fine grim smile; "you
people have been mistaken in me. Lord Fauntleroy understands me. Get
into the carriage, Fauntleroy."

And Fauntleroy jumped in, and the carriage rolled away down the green
lane, and even when it turned the corner into the high road, the Earl
was still grimly smiling.




                            CHAPTER VIII.
                          LEARNING TO RIDE.


Lord Dorincourt had occasion to wear his grim smile many a time as the
days passed by. Indeed, as his acquaintance with his grandson
progressed, he wore the smile so often that there were moments when it
almost lost its grimness. There is no denying that before Lord
Fauntleroy had appeared on the scene, the old man had been growing very
tired of his loneliness and his gout and his seventy years, but when he
saw the lad, fortunately for the little fellow, the secret pride of the
grandfather was gratified at the outset. And then when he heard the lad
talk, and saw what a well-bred little fellow he was, notwithstanding his
boyish ignorance of all that his new position meant, the old Earl liked
his grandson more, and actually began to find himself rather
entertained. It had amused him to give into those childish hands the
power to bestow a benefit on poor Higgins. Then it had gratified him to
drive to church with Cedric and to see the excitement and interest
caused by the arrival. My lord of Dorincourt was an arrogant old man,
proud of his name, proud of his rank, and therefore proud to show the
world that at last the House of Dorincourt had an heir who was worthy of
the position he was to fill.

The morning the new pony had been tried the Earl had been so pleased
that he had almost forgotten his gout. When the groom had brought out
the pretty creature, which arched its brown glossy neck and tossed its
fine head in the sun, the Earl had sat at the open window of the library
and had looked on while Fauntleroy took his first riding lesson. He
wondered if the boy would show signs of timidity.

Fauntleroy mounted in great delight. He had never been on a pony before,
and he was in the highest spirits. Wilkins, the groom, led the animal by
the bridle up and down before the library window.

After a few minutes Fauntleroy spoke to his grandfather--watching him
from the window.

"Can't I go myself?" he asked; "and can't I go faster?"

His lordship made a sign to Wilkins, who at the signal brought up his
own horse and mounted it and took Fauntleroy's pony by the leading-rein.

"Now," said the Earl, "let him trot."

The next few minutes were rather exciting to the small equestrian. He
found that trotting was not so easy as walking, and the faster the pony
trotted, the less easy it was.

"It j-jolts a g-goo-good deal--do-doesn't it?" he said to Wilkins.
"D-does it j-jolt y-you?"

"No, my lord," answered Wilkins. "You'll get used to it in time. Rise in
your stirrups."

"I'm ri-rising all the t-time," said Fauntleroy.

He was both rising and falling rather uncomfortably and with many shakes
and bounces. He was out of breath, but he held on with all his might,
and sat as straight as he could. The Earl could see that from his
window. When the riders came back within speaking distance, after they
had been hidden by the trees a few minutes, Fauntleroy's hat was off,
his cheeks were like poppies, and his lips were set, but he was still
trotting manfully.

"Stop a minute!" said his grandfather. "Where's your hat?"

Wilkins touched his. "It fell off, your lordship," he said, with evident
enjoyment. "Wouldn't let me stop to pick it up, my lord."

"Tired?" said the Earl to Fauntleroy. "Want to get off?"

"It jolts you more than you think it will," admitted his young lordship
frankly. "And it tires you a little too; but I don't want to get off. I
want to learn how. As soon as I've got my breath I want to go back for
the hat."

The cleverest person in the world, if he had undertaken to teach
Fauntleroy how to please the old man who watched him, could not have
taught him anything which would have succeeded better. As the pony
trotted off again toward the avenue, a faint colour crept up in the
fierce old face, and the eyes, under the shaggy brows, gleamed with a
pleasure such as his lordship had scarcely expected to know again. And
he sat and watched quite eagerly until the sound of the horses' hoofs
returned. When they did come, which was after some time, they came at a
faster pace. Fauntleroy's hat was still off, Wilkins was carrying it for
him; his cheeks were redder than before, and his hair was flying about
his ears, but he came at quite a brisk canter.

"There!" he panted, as they drew up, "I c-cantered."

He and Wilkins and the pony were close friends after that. Scarcely a
day passed on which the country people did not see them out together,
cantering gaily on the highroad or through the green lanes. The children
in the cottages would run to the door to look at the proud little brown
pony with the gallant little figure sitting so straight in the saddle,
and the young lord would snatch off his cap and swing it at them, and
shout, "Hallo! Good morning!" in a very unlordly manner, though with
great heartiness. Sometimes he would stop and talk with the children,
and once Wilkins came back to the Castle with a story of how Fauntleroy
had insisted on dismounting near the village school, so that a boy who
was lame and tired might ride home on his pony.

"An' I'm blessed," said Wilkins, in telling the story at the
stables,--"I'm blessed if he'd hear of anything else! He wouldn't let me
get down, because he said the boy mightn't feel comfortable on a big
horse. An' ses he, 'Wilkins,' ses he, 'that boy's lame and I'm not, and
I want to talk to him too.' And up the lad has to get, and my lord
trudges alongside of him with his hands in his pockets. And when we come
to the cottage, an' the boy's mother comes out to see what's up, he
whips off his cap an' ses he, 'I've brought your son home, ma'am,' ses
he, 'because his leg hurt him, and I don't think that stick is enough
for him to lean on; and I'm going to ask my grandfather to have a pair
of crutches made for him.'"

When the Earl heard the story, he was not angry, as Wilkins had been
half afraid that he would be; on the contrary, he laughed outright, and
called Fauntleroy up to him, and made him tell all about the matter from
beginning to end, and then he laughed again. And actually, a few days
later, the Dorincourt carriage stopped in the green lane before the
cottage where the lame boy lived, and Fauntleroy jumped out and walked
up to the door, carrying a pair of strong, light, new crutches, and
presented them to Mrs. Hartle (the lame boy's name was Hartle) with
these words: "My grandfather's compliments, and if you please, these are
for your boy, and we hope he will get better."

"I said your compliments," he explained to the Earl when he returned to
the carriage. "You didn't tell me to, but I thought perhaps you forgot.
That was right, wasn't it?"

And the Earl laughed again, and did not say it was not. In fact, the two
were becoming more intimate every day, and every day Fauntleroy's faith
in his lordship's benevolence and virtue increased. He had no doubt
whatever that his grandfather was the most amiable and generous of
elderly gentlemen. Certainly, he himself found his wishes gratified
almost before they were uttered; and such gifts and pleasures were
lavished upon him, that he was sometimes almost bewildered by his own
possessions. Perhaps, notwithstanding his sweet nature, he might have
been somewhat spoiled by it, if it had not been for the hours he spent
with his mother at Court Lodge. That "best friend" of his watched over
him very closely and tenderly. The two had many long talks together, and
he never went back to the Castle with her kisses on his cheeks without
carrying in his heart some simple, pure words worth remembering.

There was one thing, it is true, which puzzled the little fellow very
much. He thought over the mystery of it much oftener than any one
supposed; even his mother did not know how often he pondered on it; the
Earl for a long time never suspected that he did so at all. But being
quick to observe, the little boy could not help wondering why it was
that his mother and grandfather never seemed to meet. He had noticed
that they never did meet. And yet, every day, fruit and flowers were
sent to Court Lodge from the hot-houses at the Castle. But the one
virtuous action of the Earl's which had set him upon the pinnacle of
perfection in Cedric's eyes, was what he had done soon after that first
Sunday when Mrs. Errol had walked home from church unattended. About a
week later, when Cedric was going one day to visit his mother, he found
at the door, instead of the large carriage and prancing pair, a pretty
little brougham and a handsome bay horse.

"That is a present from you to your mother," the Earl said abruptly.
"She cannot go walking about the country. She needs a carriage. The man
who drives will take charge of it. It is a present from _you_."

Fauntleroy's delight could but feebly express itself. He could scarcely
contain himself until he reached the lodge. His mother was gathering
roses in the garden. He flung himself out of the little brougham and
flew to her.

"Dearest!" he cried, "could you believe it? This is yours! He says it is
a present from me. It is your own carriage to drive everywhere in!"

He was so happy that she did not know what to say. She could not have
borne to spoil his pleasure by refusing to accept the gift, even though
it came from the man who chose to consider himself her enemy. She was
obliged to step into the carriage, roses and all, and let herself be
taken for a drive, while Fauntleroy told her stories of his
grandfather's goodness and amiability. They were such innocent stories
that sometimes she could not help laughing a little, and then she would
draw her little boy closer to her side and kiss him, feeling glad that
he could see only good in the old man who had so few friends.

The very next day after that, Fauntleroy wrote to Mr. Hobbs. He wrote
quite a long letter, and after the first copy was written, he brought it
to his grandfather to be inspected.

"Because," he said, "it's so uncertain about the spelling."

These were the last lines:

   "I should like to see you and I wish dearest could live at the
   castle but I am very happy when I dont miss her too much and I
   love my granfarther every one does plees write soon

                                           "your afechshnet old friend
                                                        "Cedric Errol.

"Do you miss your mother very much?" asked the Earl when he had finished
reading this.

"Yes," said Fauntleroy, "I miss her all the time. And when I miss her
very much, I go and look out of my window to where I see her light shine
for me every night through an open place in the trees. It is a long way
off, but she puts it in her window as soon as it is dark and I can see
it twinkle far away, and I know what it says."

"What does it say?" asked my lord.

"It says, 'Good-night, God keep you all the night!'--just what she used
to say when we were together. Every night she used to say that to me,
and every morning she said, 'God bless you all the day!' So you see I am
quite safe all the time----"

"Quite, I have no doubt," said his lordship dryly. And he drew down his
beetling eyebrows and looked at the little boy so fixedly and so long
that Fauntleroy wondered what he could be thinking of.




                             CHAPTER IX.
                          THE POOR COTTAGES.


The fact was, his lordship the Earl of Dorincourt thought in those days
of many things of which he had never thought before, and all his
thoughts were in one way or another connected with his grandson. His
pride was the strongest part of his nature, and the boy gratified it at
every point. Through this pride he began to find a new interest in life.
He began to take pleasure in showing his heir to the world. The world
had known of his disappointment in his sons; so there was an agreeable
touch of triumph in exhibiting this new Lord Fauntleroy, who could
disappoint no one. He made plans for his future. Sometimes in this new
interest he forgot his gout, and after a while his doctor was surprised
to find this noble patient's health growing better than he had expected
it ever would be again. Perhaps the Earl grew better because the time
did not pass so slowly for him, and he had something to think of besides
his pains and infirmities.

One fine morning, people were amazed to see little Lord Fauntleroy
riding his pony with another companion than Wilkins. This new companion
rode a tall, powerful gray horse, and was no other than the Earl
himself.

And in their rides together through the green lanes and pretty country
roads, the two riders became more intimate than ever. And gradually the
old man heard a great deal about "Dearest" and her life. As Fauntleroy
trotted by the big horse he chatted gaily. There could not well have
been a brighter little comrade, his nature was so happy. The Earl often
was silent, listening and watching the joyous, glowing face. Sometimes
he would tell his young companion to set the pony off at a gallop, and
when the little fellow dashed off, sitting so straight and fearless, he
would watch the boy with a gleam of pride and pleasure in his eyes; and
Fauntleroy, when, after such a dash, he came back waving his cap with a
laughing shout, always felt that he and his grandfather were very good
friends indeed.

One thing that the Earl discovered was that his son's wife did not lead
an idle life. It was not long before he learned that the poor people
knew her very well indeed. When there was sickness or sorrow or poverty
in any house, the little brougham often stood before the door.

It had not displeased the Earl to find that the mother of his heir had a
beautiful young face and looked as much like a lady as if she had been a
duchess, and in one way it did not displease him to know that she was
popular and beloved by the poor. And yet he was often conscious of a
hard, jealous pang when he saw how she filled her child's heart and how
the boy clung to her as his best beloved. The old man would have desired
to stand first himself and have no rival.

He felt it to be almost incredible that he, who had never really loved
any one in his life, should find himself growing so fond of this little
fellow,--as without doubt he was. At first he had only been pleased and
proud of Cedric's beauty and bravery, but there was something more than
pride in his feeling now. He laughed a grim, dry laugh all to himself
sometimes, when he thought how he liked to have the boy near him, how he
liked to hear his voice, and how in secret he really wished to be liked
and thought well of by his small grandson.

It was only about a week after that ride when, after a visit to his
mother, Fauntleroy came into the library with a troubled, thoughtful
face. He sat down in that high-backed chair in which he had sat on the
evening of his arrival, and for a while he looked at the embers on the
hearth. The Earl watched him in silence, wondering what was coming. It
was evident that Cedric had something on his mind. At last he looked up
"Does Newick know all about the people?" he asked.

"It is his business to know about them," said his lordship. "Been
neglecting it--has he?"

Contradictory as it may seem, there was nothing which entertained and
edified him more than the little fellow's interest in his tenantry.

"There is a place," said Fauntleroy, looking up at him with wide-open,
horror-stricken eyes--"Dearest has seen it; it is at the other end of
the village. The houses are close together, and almost falling down; you
can scarcely breathe: and the people are so poor, and everything is
dreadful! The rain comes in at the roof! Dearest went to see a poor
woman who lived there. The tears ran down her cheeks when she told me
about it!"

The tears had come into his own eyes, but he smiled through them.

"I told her you didn't know, and I would tell you," he said. He jumped
down and came and leaned against the Earl's chair. "You can make it all
right," he said, "just as you made it all right for Higgins. You always
make it all right for everybody. I told her you would, and that Newick
must have forgotten to tell you."

The Earl looked down at the hand on his knee. Newick had not forgotten
to tell him; in fact, Newick had spoken to him more than once of the
desperate condition of the end of the village known as Earl's Court. Mr.
Mordaunt had painted it all to him in the strongest words he could use,
and his lordship had used violent language in response; and, when his
gout had been at the worst, he had said that the sooner the people of
Earl's Court died and were buried by the parish the better it would
be--and there was an end of the matter. And yet, as he looked at the
small hand on his knee, and from the small hand to the honest, earnest,
frank-eyed face, he was actually ashamed both of Earl's Court and of
himself.

"What!" he said; "you want to make a builder of model cottages of me, do
you?" And he positively put his own hand upon the childish one and
stroked it.

"Those must be pulled down," said Fauntleroy, with great eagerness.
"Dearest says so. Let us--let us go and have them pulled down to-morrow.
The people will be so glad when they see you! They'll know you have come
to help them!" And his eyes shone like stars in his glowing face.

The Earl rose from his chair and put his hand on the child's shoulder.
"Let us go out and take our walk on the terrace," he said, with a short
laugh; "and we can talk it over."

And though he laughed two or three times again, as they walked to and
fro on the broad stone terrace, where they walked together almost every
fine evening, he seemed to be thinking of something which did not
displease him, and still he kept his hand on his small companion's
shoulder.




                              CHAPTER X.
                          THE EARL ALARMED.


The truth was that Mrs. Errol had found a great many sad things in the
course of her work among the poor of the little village that appeared so
picturesque when it was seen from the moor-sides. Everything was not as
picturesque when seen near by, as it looked from a distance. She had
found idleness and poverty and ignorance where there should have been
comfort and industry. And she had discovered, after a while, that
Erlesboro was considered to be the worst village in that part of the
country.

As to Earl's Court, it was a disgrace, with its dilapidated houses and
miserable, careless, sickly people. When first Mrs. Errol went to the
place, it made her shudder. And a bold thought came into her wise little
mother-heart. Gradually she had begun to see, as had others, that it had
been her boy's good fortune to please the Earl very much, and that he
would scarcely be likely to be denied anything for which he expressed a
desire.

"The Earl would give him anything," she said to Mr. Mordaunt. "He would
indulge his every whim. Why should not that indulgence be used for the
good of others? It is for me to see that this shall come to pass."

She knew she could trust the kind, childish heart; so she told the
little fellow the story of Earl's Court, feeling sure that he would
speak of it to his grandfather, and hoping that some good results would
follow.

And strange as it appeared to every one, good results did follow. The
fact was that the strongest power to influence the Earl was his
grandson's perfect confidence in him--the fact that Cedric always
believed that his grandfather was going to do what was right and
generous. He could not quite make up his mind to let him discover that
he had no inclination to be generous at all, and so after some
reflection, he sent for Newick, and had quite a long interview with him
on the subject of the Court, and it was decided that the wretched hovels
should be pulled down and new houses should be built.

"It is Lord Fauntleroy who insists on it," he said dryly; "he thinks it
will improve the property. You can tell the tenants that it's his idea."

Of course, both the country people and the town people heard of the
proposed improvement. At first, many of them would not believe it; but
when a small army of workmen arrived and commenced pulling down the
crazy, squalid cottages, people began to understand that little Lord
Fauntleroy had done them a good turn again, and that through his
innocent interference the scandal of Earl's Court had at last been
removed.

When the cottages were being built, the lad and his grandfather used to
ride over to Earl's Court together to look at them, and Fauntleroy was
full of interest. He would dismount from his pony and go and make
acquaintance with the workmen, asking them questions about building and
bricklaying and telling them things about America.

When he left them, the workmen used to talk him over among themselves,
and laugh at his odd, innocent speeches; but they liked him, and liked
to see him stand among them, talking away, with his hands in his
pockets, his hat pushed back on his curls, and his small face full of
eagerness. And they would go home and tell their wives about him, and
the women would tell each other, and so it came about that almost every
one talked of, or knew some story of, little Lord Fauntleroy; and
gradually almost every one knew that the "wicked Earl" had found
something he cared for at last--something which had touched and even
warmed his hard, bitter old heart.

But no one knew quite how much it had been warmed, and how day by day
the old man found himself caring more and more for the child, who was
the only creature that had ever trusted him.

He never spoke to any one else of his feeling for Cedric; when he spoke
of him to others it was always with the same grim smile. But Fauntleroy
soon knew that his grandfather loved him and always liked him to be
near--near to his chair if they were in the library, opposite to him at
table, or by his side when he rode or drove or took his evening walk on
the broad terrace.

"Do you remember," Cedric said once looking up from his book as he lay
on the rug, "do you remember what I said to you that first night about
our being good companions? I don't think any people could be better
friends than we are, do you?"

"We are pretty good companions, I should say," replied his lordship.
"Come here."

Fauntleroy scrambled up and went to him.

"Is there anything you want," the Earl asked; "anything you have not?"

The little fellow's brown eyes fixed themselves on his grandfather with
a rather wistful look.

"Only one thing," he answered.

"What is that?" inquired the Earl.

Fauntleroy was silent a second. He had not thought matters over to
himself so long for nothing.

"What is it?" my lord repeated.

Fauntleroy answered.

"It is Dearest," he said.

The old Earl winced a little.

"But you see her almost every day," he said. "Is not that enough?"

"I used to see her all the time," said Fauntleroy. "She used to kiss me
when I went to sleep at night, and in the morning she was always there,
and we could tell each other things without waiting."

The old eyes and the young ones looked into each other through a moment
of silence. Then the Earl knitted his brows.

"Do you _never_ forget about your mother?" he said.

"No," answered Fauntleroy, "never; and she never forgets about me. I
shouldn't forget about _you_, you know, if I didn't live with you. I
should think about you all the more."

"Upon my word," said the Earl, after looking at him a moment longer, "I
believe you would!"

The jealous pang that came when the boy spoke so of his mother seemed
even stronger than it had been before--it was stronger because of this
old man's increasing affection for the boy.

But it was not long before he had other pangs, so much harder to face
that he almost forgot, for the time, he had ever hated his son's wife at
all. And in a strange and startling way it happened. One evening, just
before the Earl's Court cottages were completed, there was a grand
dinner party at Dorincourt. There had not been such a party at the
Castle for a long time. A few days before it took place, Sir Harry
Lorridaile and Lady Lorridaile, who was the Earl's only sister, actually
came for a visit--a thing which caused the greatest excitement in the
village and set Mrs. Dibble's shop-bell tinkling madly again, because it
was well known that Lady Lorridaile had only been to Dorincourt once
since her marriage, thirty-five years before. She was a handsome old
lady with white curls and dimpled, peachy cheeks, and she was as good as
gold, but she had never approved of her brother any more than did the
rest of the world, and having a strong will of her own and not being at
all afraid to speak her mind frankly, she had, after several lively
quarrels with his lordship, seen very little of him since her young
days.

Not only the poor people and farmers heard about little Lord Fauntleroy;
others knew of him. He was talked about so much and there were so many
stories of him--of his beauty, his sweet temper, his popularity, and his
growing influence over the Earl his grandfather--that rumours of him
reached the gentry at their country places and he was heard of in more
than one county of England.

And so by degrees Lady Lorridaile, too, heard of the child; she heard
about Higgins, and the lame boy, and the cottages at Earl's Court, and a
score of other things,--and she began to wish to see the little fellow.
And just as she was wondering how it might be brought about, to her
utter astonishment, she received a letter from her brother inviting her
to come with her husband to Dorincourt.

"It seems incredible!" she exclaimed. "I have heard it said that the
child has worked miracles, and I begin to believe it. They say my
brother adores the boy and can scarcely endure to have him out of sight.
And he is so proud of him! Actually, I believe he wants to show him to
us." And she accepted the invitation at once.

When she reached Dorincourt Castle with Sir Harry, it was late in the
afternoon, and she went to her room at once before seeing her brother.
Having dressed for dinner she entered the drawing-room. The Earl was
there standing near the fire and looking very tall and imposing; and at
his side stood a little boy in black velvet, and a large Vandyke collar
of rich lace--a little fellow whose round bright face was so handsome,
and who turned upon her such beautiful, candid brown eyes, that she
almost uttered an exclamation of pleasure and surprise at the sight.

As she shook hands with the Earl, she called him by the name she had not
used since her girl-hood.

"What, Molyneux," she said, "is this the child?"

"Yes, Constantia," answered the Earl, "this is the boy. Fauntleroy, this
is your grand-aunt, Lady Lorridaile."

"How do you do, grand-aunt?" said Fauntleroy.

Lady Lorridaile put her hand on his shoulder, and after looking down
into his upraised face a few seconds, kissed him warmly.

"I am your Aunt Constantia," she said, "and I loved your poor papa, and
you are very like him."

"It makes me glad when I am told I am like him," answered Fauntleroy,
"because it seems as if every one liked him,--just like Dearest,
eszackly,--Aunt Constantia," (adding the two words after a second's
pause).

Lady Lorridaile was delighted. She bent and kissed him again, and from
that moment they were warm friends.

"Well, Molyneux," she said aside to the Earl afterwards, "it could not
possibly be better than this!"

"I think not," answered his lordship dryly. "He is a fine little fellow.
We are great friends. He believes me to be the most charming and
sweet-tempered of philanthropists. I will confess to you,
Constantia,--as you would find it out if I did not,--that I am in some
slight danger of becoming rather an old fool about him."

"What does his mother think of you?" asked Lady Lorridaile, with her
usual straightforwardness.

"I have not asked her," answered the Earl, slightly scowling.

"Well," said Lady Lorridaile, "I will be frank with you at the outset,
Molyneux, and tell you I don't approve of your course, and that it is my
intention to call on Mrs. Errol as soon as possible; so if you wish to
quarrel with me, you had better mention it at once. What I hear of the
young creature makes me quite sure that her child owes her everything.
We were told even at Lorridaile Park that your poorer tenants adore her
already."

"They adore _him_," said the Earl, nodding towards Fauntleroy. "As to
Mrs. Errol, you'll find her a pretty little woman. I'm rather in debt to
her for giving some of her beauty to the boy, and you can go to see her
if you like. All I ask is that she will remain at Court Lodge and that
you will not ask me to go and see her," and he scowled a little again.

"But he doesn't hate her as much as he used to, that is plain enough to
me," her ladyship said to Sir Harry afterwards. "And he is a changed man
in a measure, and, incredible as it may seem, Harry, it is my opinion
that he is being made into a human being, through nothing more or less
than his affection for that innocent, affectionate little fellow."

The very next day she went to call upon Mrs. Errol. When she returned,
she said to her brother:

"Molyneux, she is the loveliest little woman I ever saw! She has a voice
like a silver bell, and you may thank her for making the boy what he is.
She has given him more than her beauty, and you make a great mistake in
not persuading her to come and take charge of you. I shall invite her to
Lorridaile."

"She'll not leave the boy," replied the Earl.

"I must have the boy too," said Lady Lorridaile, laughing.

But she knew Fauntleroy would not be given up to her, and each day she
saw more clearly how closely those two had grown to each other, and how
all the proud, grim old man's ambition and hope and love centred
themselves in the child, and how the warm, innocent nature returned his
affection with most perfect trust and good faith.

She knew, too, that the prime reason for the great dinner party was the
Earl's secret desire to show the world his grandson and heir. Perhaps
there was not one person who accepted the invitation without feeling
some curiosity about little Lord Fauntleroy, and wondering if he would
be on view.

And when the time came he was on view.

"The lad has good manners," said the Earl. "He will be in no one's way.
He can actually answer when he's spoken to, and be silent when he is
not."

But he was not allowed to be silent very long. Every one had something
to say to him. The fact was they wished to make him talk. The ladies
petted him and asked him questions, and the men asked him questions too,
and joked with him, as the men on the steamer had done when he crossed
the Atlantic.

But though he was talked to so much, as the Earl had said, he was in no
one's way. He could be quiet and listen when others talked, and so no
one found him tiresome.

Mr. Havisham had been expected to arrive in the afternoon, but, strange
to say, he was late. Such a thing had really never been known to happen
before during all the years in which he had been a visitor at Dorincourt
Castle. He was so late that the guests were on the point of rising to go
in to dinner when he arrived. When he approached his host, the Earl
regarded him with amazement. He looked as if he had been hurried or
agitated; his dry, keen old face was actually pale.

"I was detained," he said, in a low voice to the Earl, "by--an
extraordinary event."

It was as unlike the methodic old lawyer to be agitated by anything as
it was to be late, but it was evident that he had been disturbed. At
dinner he ate scarcely anything, and two or three times, when he was
spoken to, he started as if his thoughts were far away. At dessert, when
Fauntleroy came in, he looked at him more than once, nervously and
uneasily. Fauntleroy noted the look and wondered at it. He and Mr.
Havisham were on friendly terms, and they usually exchanged smiles.

The lawyer seemed to have forgotten to smile that evening.

He did not exactly know how the long, superb dinner ended. He sat
through it as if he were in a dream, and several times he saw the Earl
glance at him in surprise.

But it was over at last, and the gentlemen joined the ladies in the
drawing-room. They found Fauntleroy sitting on a sofa with Miss Vivian
Herbert,--the great beauty of the last London season; they had been
looking at some pictures, and he was thanking his companion, as the door
opened.

"I'm ever so much obliged to you for being so kind to me!" he was
saying; "I never was at a party before, and I've enjoyed myself so
much!"

He had enjoyed himself so much that his eyelids began to droop. He was
quite sure he was not going to sleep, but there was a large, yellow
satin cushion behind him and his head sank against it, and after a while
his eyelids drooped for the last time.

                   *       *       *       *       *

No sooner had the last guest left the room, than Mr. Havisham turned
from his place by the fire, and stepped nearer the sofa, where he stood
looking down at the sleeping occupant.

"Well, Havisham," said the Earl's harsh voice behind him. "What is it?
It is evident something has happened. What was the extraordinary event,
if I may ask?"

Mr. Havisham turned from the sofa, still rubbing his chin.

"It was bad news," he answered, "distressing news, my lord--the worst of
news. I am sorry to be the bearer of it."

The Earl had been uneasy for some time during the evening, as he glanced
at Mr. Havisham, and when he was uneasy he was always ill-tempered.

"Why do you look so at the boy!" he exclaimed irritably. "You have been
looking at him all the evening as if--. What has your news to do with
Lord Fauntleroy?"

"My lord," said Mr. Havisham, "I will waste no words. My news has
everything to do with Lord Fauntleroy. And if we are to believe it--it
is not Lord Fauntleroy who lies sleeping before us, but only the son of
Captain Errol. And the present Lord Fauntleroy is the son of your son
Bevis, and is at this moment in a lodging-house in London."

The Earl clutched the arms of his chair with both his hands until the
veins stood out upon them; the veins stood out on his forehead too; his
fierce old face was almost livid.

"What do you mean!" he cried out. "You are mad! Whose lie is this?"

"If it is a lie," answered Mr. Havisham, "it is painfully like the
truth. A woman came to my chambers this morning. She said your son Bevis
married her six years ago in London. She showed me her marriage
certificate. They quarrelled a year after the marriage, and he paid her
to keep away from him. She has a son five years old. She is an American
of the lower classes,--an ignorant person,--and until lately she did not
fully understand what her son could claim. She consulted a lawyer, and
found out that the boy was really Lord Fauntleroy and the heir to the
earldom of Dorincourt; and she, of course, insists on his claims being
acknowledged."

The handsome, grim old face was ghastly. A bitter smile fixed itself
upon it.

"I should refuse to believe a word of it," he said, "if it were not such
a low, scoundrelly piece of business that it becomes quite possible in
connection with the name of my son Bevis. It is quite like Bevis. He was
always a disgrace to us. The woman is an ignorant, vulgar person, you
say?"

"I am obliged to admit that she can scarcely spell her own name,"
answered the lawyer. "She cares for nothing but the money. She is very
handsome in a coarse way, but----"

The fastidious old lawyer ceased speaking and gave a sort of shudder.

The veins on the old Earl's forehead stood out like purple cords.
Something else stood out upon it too--cold drops of moisture. He took
out his handkerchief and swept them away. His smile grew even more
bitter.

"And I," he said, "I objected to--to the other woman, the mother of this
child" (pointing to the sleeping form on the sofa); "I refused to
recognize her. And yet she could spell her own name. I suppose this is
retribution."

Suddenly he sprang up from his chair and began to walk up and down the
room. Fierce and terrible words poured forth from his lips. His rage and
hatred and cruel disappointment shook him as a storm shakes a tree.

"I might have known it," he said. "They were a disgrace to me from their
first hour! I hated them both; and they hated me! Bevis was the worse of
the two. I will not believe this yet though! I will contend against it
to the last. But it is like Bevis--it is like him!"

And then he raged again and asked questions about the woman, about her
proofs, and pacing the room, turned first white and then purple in his
repressed fury.

When at last he had learned all that was to be told, and knew the worst,
Mr. Havisham looked at him with a feeling of anxiety. He looked broken
and haggard and changed. His rages had always been bad for him, but this
one had been worse than the rest because there had been something more
than rage in it.

He came slowly back to the sofa, at last, and stood near it.

"If any one had told me I could be fond of a child," he said, his harsh
voice low and unsteady, "I should not have believed them. I always
detested children--my own more than the rest. I am fond of this one; he
is fond of me" (with a bitter smile). "I am not popular; I never was.
But he is fond of me. He never was afraid of me--he always trusted me.
He would have filled my place better than I have filled it. I know that.
He would have been an honour to the name."

He bent down and stood a minute or so looking at the happy, sleeping
face. He put up his hand, pushed the bright hair back from the forehead,
and then turned away and rang the bell.

When the footman appeared, he pointed to the sofa.

"Take"--he said, and then his voice changed a little--"take Lord
Fauntleroy to his room."




                             CHAPTER XI.
                         ANXIETY IN AMERICA.


When Mr. Hobbs's young friend left him to go to Dorincourt Castle and
become Lord Fauntleroy, and the grocery-man had time to realise that the
Atlantic Ocean lay between himself and the small companion who had spent
so many agreeable hours in his society, he began to feel very lonely
indeed. At first it seemed to Mr. Hobbs that Cedric was not really far
away, and would come back again; that some day he would look up from his
paper and see the lad standing in the doorway, in his white suit and red
stockings, and with his straw hat on the back of his head, and would
hear him say in his cheerful little voice: "Hello, Mr. Hobbs! This is a
hot day--isn't it?" But as the days passed on and this did not happen,
Mr. Hobbs felt very dull and uneasy. He did not even enjoy his newspaper
as much as he used to. He would take out his gold watch and open it and
stare at the inscription; "From his oldest friend, Lord Fauntleroy, to
Mr. Hobbs. When this you see, remember me." At night, when the store was
closed, he would light his pipe and walk slowly along until he reached
the house where Cedric had lived, on which there was a sign that read,
"This House to Let"; and he would stop near it and look up and shake his
head, and puff at his pipe very hard, and after a while walk mournfully
back again.

This went on for two or three weeks before a new idea came to him. He
would go to see Dick. He smoked a great many pipes before he arrived at
the conclusion, but finally he did arrive at it. He would go to see
Dick. He knew all about Dick. Cedric had told him, and his idea was that
perhaps Dick might be some comfort to him in the way of talking things
over.

So one day when Dick was very hard at work blacking a customer's boots,
a short, stout man with a heavy face and a bald head, stared for two or
three minutes at the bootblack's sign, which read:

                        "Professor Dick Tipton
                           Can't be beat."

He stared at it so long that Dick began to take a lively interest in
him, and when he had put the finishing touch to his customer's boots, he
said:

"Want a shine, sir?"

The stout man came forward deliberately and put his foot on the rest.

"Yes," he said.

Then when Dick fell to work, the stout man looked from Dick to the sign
and from the sign to Dick.

"Where did you get that?" he asked.

"From a friend o' mine," said Dick,--"a little feller. He was the best
little feller ye ever saw. He's in England now. Gone to be one o' those
lords."

"Lord--Lord--" asked Mr. Hobbs, with ponderous slowness, "Lord
Fauntleroy--Goin' to be Earl of Dorincourt!"

Dick almost dropped his brush.

"Why, boss!" he exclaimed, "d'ye know him yerself?"

"I've known him," answered Mr. Hobbs, wiping his warm forehead, "ever
since he was born. We were lifetime acquaintances--that's what _we_
were."

It really made him feel quite agitated to speak of it. He pulled the
splendid gold watch out of his pocket and opened it, and showed the
inside of the case to Dick.

"'When this you see, remember me,'" he read. "That was his parting
keepsake to me. I'd ha' remembered him," he went on, shaking his head,
"if he hadn't given me a thing. He was a companion as _any_ man would
remember."

It proved that they had so much to say to each other that it was not
possible to say it all at one time, and so it was agreed that the next
night Dick should make a visit to the store and keep Mr. Hobbs company.

This was the beginning of quite a substantial friendship. When Dick went
up to the store, Mr. Hobbs received him with great hospitality. He gave
him a chair tilted against the door, near a barrel of apples, and after
his young visitor was seated, he made a jerk at them with the hand in
which he held his pipe, saying:

"Help yerself."

Then they read, and discussed the British aristocracy; and Mr. Hobbs
smoked his pipe very hard and shook his head a great deal.

He seemed to derive a great deal of comfort from Dick's visit. Before
Dick went home, they had a supper in the small back room; they had
biscuits and cheese and sardines, and other things out of the store, and
Mr. Hobbs solemnly opened two bottles of ginger ale, and pouring out two
glasses, proposed a toast.

"Here's to _him_!" he said, lifting his glass, "an' may he teach 'em a
lesson--earls an' markises an' dooks an' all!"

After that night, the two saw each other often, and Mr. Hobbs was much
more comfortable and less desolate. They read the _Penny Story Gazette_,
and many other interesting things, and gained a knowledge of the habits
of the nobility and gentry which would have surprised those despised
classes if they had realised it. One day Mr. Hobbs made a pilgrimage to
a book-store down town, for the express purpose of adding to their
library. He went to a clerk and leaned over the counter to speak to him.

"I want," he said, "a book about earls."

"What!" exclaimed the clerk.

"A book," repeated the grocery-man, "about earls."

"I'm afraid," said the clerk, looking rather queer, "that we haven't
what you want."

"Haven't?" said Mr. Hobbs, anxiously. "Well, say markises then--or
dooks."

"I know of no such book," answered the clerk.

Mr. Hobbs was much disturbed. He looked down on the floor,--then he
looked up.

"None about female earls?" he inquired.

"I'm afraid not," said the clerk, with a smile.

"Well," exclaimed Mr. Hobbs, "I'll be jiggered!"

He was just going out of the store, when the clerk called him back and
asked him if a story in which the nobility were chief characters would
do. Mr. Hobbs said it would--if he could not get an entire volume
devoted to earls. So the clerk sold him a book called _The Tower of
London_, written by Mr. Harrison Ainsworth, and he carried it home.

When Dick came they began to read it. It was a very wonderful and
exciting book, and the scene was laid in the reign of the famous English
queen who is called by some people Bloody Mary. And as Mr. Hobbs heard
of Queen Mary's deeds and the habit she had of chopping people's heads
off, putting them to the torture, and burning them alive, he became very
much excited. He took his pipe out of his mouth and stared at Dick.

"Why, he ain't safe!" he said. "He ain't safe! If the women folks can
sit up on their thrones an' give the word for things like that to be
done, who's to know what's happening to him this very minute?"

"Well," said Dick, though he looked rather anxious himself; "ye see this
'ere un isn't the one that's bossin' things now. I know her name's
Victory, an' this un here in the book,--her name's Mary."

"So it is," said Mr. Hobbs, still mopping his forehead; "so it is,--but
still it doesn't seem as if 'twas safe for him over there with those
queer folks. Why, they tell me they don't keep the Fourth o' July!"

He was privately uneasy for several days; and it was not until he
received Fauntleroy's letter and had read it several times, both to
himself and to Dick, and had also read the letter Dick got about the
same time, that he became composed again.

But they both found great pleasure in their letters. They read and
re-read them, and talked them over and enjoyed every word of them. And
they spent days over the answers they sent, and read them over almost as
often as the letters they had received.

One day they were sitting in the store doorway together, and Mr. Hobbs
was filling his pipe, whilst Dick told him all about his life and his
elder brother, who had been very good to him after their parents had
died. The brother's name was Ben, and he had managed to get quite a
decent place in a store. "And then," said Dick, "blest if he didn't go
an' marry a gal, a regular tiger-cat. She'd tear things to pieces, when
she got mad. Had a baby just like her; 'n' at last Ben went out West
with a man to set up a cattle ranch."

"He oughtn't to 've married," Mr. Hobbs said solemnly, as he rose to get
a match.

As he took the match from its box, he stopped and looked down on the
counter.

"Why!" he said, "if here isn't a letter! I didn't see it afore. The
postman must have laid it down when I wasn't noticin', or the newspaper
slipped over it."

He picked it up and looked at it carefully.

"It's from _him_!" he exclaimed. "That's the very one it's from!"

He forgot his pipe altogether. He went back to his chair quite excited,
and took his pocket-knife and opened the envelope.

"I wonder what news there is this time," he said.

And then he unfolded the letter and read as follows:

                                                   "Dorincourt Castle.

   "My dear Mr. Hobbs.

   "I write this in a great hury becaus i have something curous to
   tell you i know you will be very mutch suprised my dear frend
   when i tel you. It is all a mistake and i am not a lord and i
   shall not have to be an earl there is a lady whitch was marid to
   my uncle bevis who is dead and she has a little boy and he is
   lord fauntleroy becaus that is the way it is in England and my
   name is Cedric Errol like it was when I was in New York and all
   the things will belong to the other boy i thought at first i
   should have to give him my pony and cart but my grandfarther says
   i need not my grandfarther is very sorry i am not rich now becaus
   when your papa is only the youngest son he is not very rich i am
   going to learn to work so that I can take care of dearest i have
   been asking Wilkins about grooming horses preaps i might be a
   groom or a coachman. I thort i would tell you and Dick right away
   becaus you would be intrusted so no more at present with love
   from

                                                       "your old frend
                                 "Cedric Errol (Not lord Fauntleroy)."

Mr. Hobbs fell back in his chair, the letter dropped on his knee, his
penknife slipped to the floor, and so did the envelope.

"Well!" he ejaculated, "I am jiggered!"

He was so dumfounded that he actually changed his exclamation. It had
always been his habit to say, "I _will_ be jiggered," but this time he
said, "I _am_ jiggered." Perhaps he really _was_ jiggered. There is no
knowing.

"Well," said Mr. Hobbs. "It's my opinion it's all a put-up job o' the
British 'ristycrats to rob him of his rights because he's an American.
They're trying to rob him! that's what they're doing, and folks that
have money ought to look after him."

And he kept Dick with him until quite a late hour to talk it over, and
when that young man left he went with him to the corner of the street;
and on his way back he stopped opposite the empty house for some time,
staring at the "To Let," and smoking his pipe in much disturbance of
mind.




                             CHAPTER XII.
                         THE RIVAL CLAIMANTS.


A very few days after the dinner-party at the Castle, almost everybody
in England who read the newspaper at all knew the romantic story of what
had happened at Dorincourt. It made a very interesting story when it was
told with all the details. There was the little American boy who had
been brought to England to be Lord Fauntleroy, and who was said to be so
fine and handsome a little fellow, and to have already made people fond
of him; there was the old Earl, his grandfather, who was so proud of his
heir; there was the pretty young mother who had never been forgiven for
marrying Captain Errol; and there was the strange marriage of Bevis the
dead Lord Fauntleroy, and the strange wife, of whom no one knew
anything, suddenly appearing with her son, and saying that he was the
real Lord Fauntleroy and must have his rights. All these things were
talked about and written about, and caused a tremendous sensation. And
then there came the rumour that the Earl of Dorincourt was not satisfied
with the turn affairs had taken, and would perhaps contest the claim by
law, and the matter might end with a wonderful trial.

There never had been such excitement before in the county in which
Erlesboro was situated. On market-days, people stood in groups and
talked and wondered what would be done; the farmers' wives invited one
another to tea that they might tell one another all they had heard and
all they thought and all they thought other people thought.

In fact there was excitement everywhere; at the Castle, in the library,
where the Earl and Mr. Havisham sat and talked; in the servants' hall,
where Mr. Thomas and the butler and the other men and women servants
gossiped and exclaimed at all times of the day; and in the stables,
where Wilkins went about his work in a quite depressed state of mind.

But in the midst of all the disturbance there was one person who was
quite calm and untroubled. That person was the little Lord Fauntleroy
who was said not to be Lord Fauntleroy at all. When first the Earl told
him what had happened, he had sat on a stool holding on to his knee, as
he so often did when he was listening to anything interesting; and by
the time the story was finished, he looked quite sober.

"It makes me feel very queer," he said; "it makes me--queer!"

The Earl looked at the boy in silence. It made him feel queer
too--queerer than he had ever felt in his whole life. And he felt more
queer still when he saw that there was a troubled expression on the
small face which was usually so happy.

"Will they take Dearest's house away from her--and her carriage?" Cedric
asked in a rather unsteady, anxious little voice.

"_No!_" said the Earl decidedly--in quite a loud voice in fact. "They
can take nothing from her."

"Ah!" said Cedric with evident relief. "Can't they?"

Then he looked up at his grandfather, and there was a wistful shade in
his eyes, and they looked very big and soft.

"That other boy," he said rather tremulously--"he will have to--to be
your boy now--as I was--won't he?"

"_No!_" answered the Earl--and he said it so fiercely and loudly that
Cedric quite jumped.

"No?" he exclaimed, in wonderment. "Won't he? I thought----"

He stood up from his stool quite suddenly.

"Shall I be your boy, even if I'm not going to be an earl?" he said.
"Shall I be your boy, just as I was before?" And his flushed little face
was all alight with eagerness.

How the old Earl did look at him from head to foot, to be sure! How his
great shaggy brows did draw themselves together, and how queerly his
deep eyes shone under them--how very queerly!

"My boy!" he said "yes, you'll be my boy as long as I live; and, by
George, sometimes I feel as if you were the only boy I had ever had."

Cedric's face turned red to the roots of his hair; it turned red with
relief and pleasure. He put both his hands deep into his pockets and
looked squarely into his noble relative's eyes.

"Do you?" he said. "Well, then, I don't care about the earl part at all.
I don't care whether I'm an earl or not. I thought--you see, I thought
the one that was going to be the Earl would have to be your boy too,
and--and I couldn't be. That was what made me feel so queer."

The Earl put his hand on his shoulder and drew him nearer.

"They shall take nothing from you that I can hold for you," he said,
drawing his breath hard. "I won't believe yet that they can take
anything from you. You were made for the place, and--well, you may fill
it still. But whatever comes, you shall have all that I can give
you--all!"

It scarcely seemed as if he were speaking to a child, there was such
determination in his face and voice; it was more as if he were making a
promise to himself--and perhaps he was.

He had never before known how deep a hold upon him his fondness for the
boy and his pride in him had taken. He had never seen his strength and
good qualities and beauty as he seemed to see them now. To his obstinate
nature it seemed impossible--to give up what he had so set his heart
upon. And he had determined that he would not give it up without a
fierce struggle.

Within a few days after she had seen Mr. Havisham, the woman who claimed
to be Lady Fauntleroy presented herself at the Castle, and brought her
child with her. She was sent away. The Earl would not see her, she was
told by the footman at the door; his lawyer would attend to her cause.

Mr. Havisham had noticed, during his interviews with her, that she was
neither so clever nor so bold as she meant to be. It was as if she had
not expected to meet with such opposition.

"She is evidently," the lawyer said to Mrs. Errol, "a person from the
lower walks of life. She is uneducated and quite unused to meeting
people like ourselves on any terms of equality. She does not know what
to do. Her visit to the Castle quite cowed her. She was infuriated, but
she was cowed. The Earl would not receive her, but I advised him to go
with me to the Dorincourt Arms, where she is staying. When she saw him
enter the room, she turned white, though she flew into a rage at once,
and threatened and demanded in one breath."

The fact was that the Earl had stalked into the room and stood, looking
like a venerable aristocratic giant, staring at the woman and not
condescending a word. He let her talk and demand until she was tired,
without himself uttering a word, and then he said:

"You say you are my eldest son's wife. If that is true, and if the proof
you offer is too much for us, the law is on your side. In that case,
your boy is Lord Fauntleroy. If your claims are proved, you will be
provided for. I want to see nothing either of you or the child so long
as I live."

And then he turned his back upon her and stalked out of the room as he
had stalked into it.

Not many days after that, a visitor was announced to Mrs. Errol, who was
writing in her little morning room. The maid who brought the message
looked rather excited.

"It's the Earl hisself, ma'am!" she said in tremulous awe.

When Mrs. Errol entered the drawing-room, a very tall, majestic-looking
old man was standing on the tiger-skin rug. He had a handsome, grim old
face, with an aquiline profile, a long white moustache, and an obstinate
look.

"Mrs. Errol, I believe?" he said.

"Mrs. Errol," she answered.

"I am the Earl of Dorincourt," he said.

He paused a moment, almost unconsciously, to look into her uplifted
eyes. They were so like the big, affectionate, childish eyes he had seen
uplifted to his own so often every day during the last few months, that
they gave him a quite curious sensation.

"The boy is very like you," he said abruptly.

"It has been often said so, my lord," she replied, "but I have been glad
to think him like his father also."

As Lady Lorridaile had told him, her voice was very sweet, and her
manner was very simple and dignified. She did not seem in the least
troubled by his sudden coming.

"Yes," said the Earl, "he is like--my son--too." He put his hand up to
his big white moustache and pulled it fiercely. "Do you know," he said,
"why I have come here?"

"I have seen Mr. Havisham," Mrs. Errol began, "and he has told me of the
claims which have been made----"

"I have come to tell you," said the Earl, "that they will be
investigated and contested, if a contest can be made. I have come to
tell you that the boy shall be defended with all the power of the law.
His rights----"

The soft voice interrupted him.

"He must have nothing that is _not_ his by right, even if the law can
give it to him," she said.

"Unfortunately the law cannot," said the Earl. "If it could, it should.
This outrageous woman and her child----"

"Perhaps she cares for him as much as I care for Cedric, my lord," said
little Mrs. Errol. "And if she was your eldest son's wife, her son is
Lord Fauntleroy, and mine is not."

"I suppose," said the Earl, "that you would much prefer that he should
not be the Earl of Dorincourt?"

Her fair young face flushed.

"It is a very magnificent thing to be the Earl of Dorincourt, my lord,"
she said. "I know that, but I care most that he should be what his
father was--brave and just and true always."

"In striking contrast to what his grandfather was, eh?" said his
lordship sardonically.

"I have not had the pleasure of knowing his grandfather," replied Mrs.
Errol, "but I know my little boy believes----" She stopped short a
moment, looking quietly into his face, and then she added, "I know that
Cedric loves you."

"Would he have loved me," said the Earl dryly, "if you had told him why
I did not receive you at the Castle?"

"No," answered Mrs. Errol; "I think not. That was why I did not wish him
to know."

"Well," said my lord, brusquely, "there are few women who would not have
told him."

He suddenly began to walk up and down the room, pulling his great
moustache more violently than ever.

"Yes, he is fond of me," he said, "and I am fond of him. I can't say I
ever was fond of anything before. I am fond of him. He pleased me from
the first. I am an old man, and was tired of my life. He has given me
something to live for. I am proud of him. I was satisfied to think of
his taking his place some day as the head of the family."

He came back and stood before Mrs. Errol.

"I am miserable," he said. "Miserable!"

He looked as if he was. Even his pride could not keep his voice steady
or his hands from shaking. For a moment it almost seemed as if his deep,
fierce eyes had tears in them. "Perhaps it is because I am miserable
that I have come to you," he said, quite glaring down at her. "I used to
hate you; I have been jealous of you. This wretched, disgraceful
business has changed that. I have been an obstinate old fool, and I
suppose I have treated you badly. You are like the boy and the boy is
the first object in my life. I am miserable, and I came to you merely
because you are like the boy, and he cares for you, and I care for him.
Treat me as well as you can, for the boy's sake."

He said it all in his harsh voice, and almost roughly, but somehow he
seemed so broken down for the time that Mrs. Errol was touched to the
heart. She got up and moved an arm-chair a little forward.

"I wish you would sit down," she said in a soft, pretty, sympathetic
way. "You have been so much troubled that you are very tired, and you
need all your strength."

It was just as new to him to be spoken to and cared for in that gentle,
simple way as it was to be contradicted. He was reminded of "the boy"
again, and he actually did as she asked him. Perhaps his disappointment
and wretchedness were good discipline for him; if he had not been
wretched he might have continued to hate her, but just at present he
found her a little soothing. She had so sweet a face and voice, and a
pretty dignity when she spoke or moved. Very soon, by the quiet magic of
these influences, he began to feel less gloomy, and then he talked still
more.

"Whatever happens," he said, "the boy shall be provided for. He shall be
taken care of, now and in the future."

Before he went away, he glanced around the room.

"Do you like the house?" he demanded.

"Very much," she answered.

"This is a cheerful room," he said. "May I come here again and talk this
matter over?"

"As often as you wish, my lord," she replied.

And then he went out to his carriage and drove away, Thomas and Henry
almost stricken dumb upon the box at the turn affairs had taken.




                            CHAPTER XIII.
                         DICK TO THE RESCUE.


Of course, as soon as the story of Lord Fauntleroy and the difficulties
of the Earl of Dorincourt were discussed in the English newspapers, they
were discussed in the American newspapers. The story was too interesting
to be passed over lightly, and it was talked of a great deal. There were
so many versions of it that it would have been an edifying thing to buy
all the papers and compare them. Mr. Hobbs used to read the papers until
his head was in a whirl, and in the evening he and Dick would talk it
all over. They found out what an important personage an Earl of
Dorincourt was, and what a magnificent income he possessed, and how many
estates he owned, and how stately and beautiful was the Castle in which
he lived; and the more they learned the more excited they became.

"Seem's like somethin' orter be done," said Mr. Hobbs.

But there really was nothing they could do but each write a letter to
Cedric, containing assurances of their friendship and sympathy. They
wrote those letters as soon as they could after receiving the news.

The very next morning, one of Dick's customers was rather surprised. He
was a young lawyer just beginning practice; as poor as a very young
lawyer can possibly be, but a bright, energetic young fellow, with sharp
wit and a good temper. He had a shabby office near Dick's stand, and
every morning Dick blacked his boots for him.

That particular morning, when he put his foot on the rest, he had an
illustrated paper in his hand--an enterprising paper, with pictures in
it of conspicuous people and things. He had just finished looking it
over, and when the last boot was polished, he handed it to the boy.

"Here's a paper for you, Dick," he said. "Picture of an English castle
in it and an English earl's daughter-in-law. You ought to become
familiar with the nobility and gentry, Dick. Begin on the Right
Honourable the Earl of Dorincourt and Lady Fauntleroy. Hello! I say,
what's the matter?"

The pictures he spoke of were on the front page, and Dick was staring at
one of them with his eyes and mouth open, and his sharp face almost pale
with excitement.

He pointed to the picture, under which was written:

"Mother of Claimant (Lord Fauntleroy)."

It was the picture of a handsome woman, with large eyes and heavy braids
of black hair wound around her head.

"Her!" said Dick. "I know her better'n I know you! An' I've struck work
for this mornin'."

And in less than five minutes from that time he was tearing through the
streets on his way to Mr. Hobbs and the corner store. Mr. Hobbs could
scarcely believe the evidence of his senses when he looked across the
counter and saw Dick rush in with the paper in his hand. The boy was out
of breath with running; so much out of breath, in fact, that he could
scarcely speak as he threw the paper down on the counter.

"Look at it!" panted Dick. "Look at that woman in the picture! That's
what you look at! _She_ aint no 'ristocrat, _she_ aint!" with withering
scorn. "She's no lord's wife. You may eat me, if it aint Minna--_Minna!_
I'd know her anywheres, an' so'd Ben. Jest ax him."

Mr. Hobbs dropped into his seat.

"I knowed it was a put-up job," he said. "I knowed it; and they done it
on account o' him bein' a 'Merican!"

"Done it!" cried Dick, with disgust. "_She_ done it, that's who done it.
I'll tell yer wot come to me, the minnit I saw her pictur. There was one
o' them papers we saw had a letter in it that said somethin' 'bout her
boy, an' it said he had a scar on his chin. Put them together--her 'n'
that scar! Why that boy o' hers aint no more a lord than I am! It's
_Ben's_ boy."

Professor Dick Tipton had always been a sharp boy, and earning his
living in the streets of a big city had made him still sharper. He had
learned to keep his eyes open and his wits about him, and it mast be
confessed he enjoyed immensely the excitement and impatience of that
moment.

Mr. Hobbs was almost overwhelmed by his sense of responsibility, and
Dick was all alive and full of energy. He began to write a letter to
Ben, and he cut out the picture and inclosed it to him, and Mr. Hobbs
wrote a letter to Cedric and one to the Earl. They were in the midst of
this letter-writing when a new idea came to Dick.

"Say," he said, "the feller that give me the paper, he's a lawyer. Let's
ax him what we'd better do. Lawyers knows it all."

Mr. Hobbs was immensely impressed by this suggestion and Dick's business
capacity.

"That's so!" he replied. "This here calls for lawyers."

And leaving the store in care of a substitute, he struggled into his
coat and marched down town with Dick, and the two presented themselves
with their romantic story in Mr. Harrison's office, much to that young
man's astonishment.

If he had not been a very young lawyer, with a very enterprising mind
and a great deal of spare time on his hands, he might not have been so
readily interested in what they had to say, for it all certainly sounded
very wild and queer; but he chanced to want something to do very much.

"And," said Mr. Hobbs, "say what your time's worth an hour and look into
this thing thorough, and _I'll_ pay the damage--Silas Hobbs, corner of
Blank Street, Vegetables and Groceries."

"Well," said Mr. Harrison, "it will be a big thing if it turns out all
right, and it will be almost as big a thing for me as for Lord
Fauntleroy; and at any rate, no harm can be done by investigating. It
appears there has been some dubiousness about the child. The woman
contradicted herself in some of her statements about his age, and
aroused suspicion. The first persons to be written to are Dick's brother
and the Earl of Dorincourt's family lawyer."

And actually before the sun went down, two letters had been written and
sent in two different directions--one speeding out of New York harbour
on a mail steamer on its way to England, and the other on a train
carrying letters and passengers bound for California. And the first was
addressed to T. Havisham, Esq., and the second to Benjamin Tipton.

And after the store was closed that evening, Mr. Hobbs and Dick sat in
the back room and talked together until midnight.




                             CHAPTER XIV.
                            THE EXPOSURE.


It is astonishing how short a time it takes for very wonderful things to
happen. It had taken only a few minutes, apparently, to change all the
fortunes of the little boy dangling his red legs from the high stool in
Mr. Hobbs's store, and to transform him from a small boy, living the
simplest life in a quiet street, into an English nobleman, the heir to
an earldom and magnificent wealth. It had taken only a few minutes,
apparently, to change him from an English nobleman into a penniless
little impostor, with no right to any of the splendours he had been
enjoying. And, surprising as it may appear, it did not take nearly so
long a time as one might have expected to alter the face of everything
again and to give back to him all that he had been in danger of losing.

It took the less time because, after all, the woman who had called
herself Lady Fauntleroy was not nearly so clever as she was wicked; and
when she had been closely pressed by Mr. Havisham's questions about her
marriage and her boy, she had made one or two blunders which had caused
suspicion to be awakened; and then she had lost her presence of mind and
her temper, and in her excitement and anger had betrayed herself still
further. There seemed no doubt that she had been married to Bevis, Lord
Fauntleroy, but Mr. Havisham found out that her story of the boy's being
born in a certain part of London was false; and just when they all were
in the midst of the commotion caused by this discovery, there came the
letter from the young lawyer in New York, and Mr. Hobbs's letters also.

What an evening it was when those letters arrived, and when Mr. Havisham
and the Earl sat and talked their plans over in the library!

"After my first three meetings with her," said Mr. Havisham, "I began to
suspect her strongly. Our best plan will be to cable at once for these
two Tiptons, say nothing about them to her, and suddenly confront her
with them when she is not expecting it. My opinion is that she will
betray herself on the spot."

And that was what actually happened. She was told nothing, but one fine
morning, as she sat in her sitting-room at the inn called "The
Dorincourt Arms," making some very fine plans for herself, Mr. Havisham
was announced; and when he entered, he was followed by no leas than
three persons--one was a sharp-faced boy and one was a big young man,
and the third was the Earl of Dorincourt.

She sprang to her feet and actually uttered a cry of terror. She had
thought of these new-comers as being thousands of miles away, when she
had ever thought of them at all, which she had scarcely done for years.
She had never expected to see them again. It must be confessed that Dick
grinned a little when he saw her.

"Hello, Minna!" he said,

The big young man--who was Ben--stood still a minute and looked at her.

"Do you know her?" Mr. Havisham asked, glancing from one to the other.

"Yes," said Ben. "I know her and she knows me. I can swear to her in any
court, and I can bring a dozen others who will. Her father is a
respectable sort of man, and he's honest enough to be ashamed of her.
He'll tell you who she is, and whether she married me or not."

Then he clenched his hand suddenly and turned on her.

"Where's the child?" he demanded. "He's going with me! He is done with
you, and so am I!"

And just as he finished saying the words, the door leading into the
bedroom opened a little, and the boy, probably attracted by the sound of
the loud voices, looked in. He was not a handsome boy, but he had rather
a nice face, and he was quite like Ben, his father, as any one could
see, and there was the three-cornered scar on his chin.

Ben walked up to him and took his hand, and his own was trembling.

"Tom," he said to the little fellow. "I'm your father; I've come to take
you away. Where's your hat?"

The boy pointed to where it lay on a chair. It evidently rather pleased
him to hear that he was going away. Ben took up the hat and marched to
the door.

"If you want me again," he said to Mr. Havisham, "you know where to find
me."

He walked out of the room, holding the child's hand and not looking at
the woman once. She was fairly raving with fury, and the Earl was calmly
gazing at her through his eyeglasses, which he had quietly placed upon
his aristocratic eagle nose.

"Come, come, my young woman," said Mr. Havisham. "This won't do at all.
If you don't want to be locked up, you really must behave yourself."

And there was something so very business-like in his tones that,
probably feeling that the safest thing she could do would be to get out
of the way, she gave him one savage look and dashed past him into the
next room and slammed the door.

"We shall have no more trouble with her," said Mr. Havisham.

And he was right; for that very night she left the Dorincourt Arms and
took the train to London, and was seen no more.

                   *       *       *       *       *

When the Earl left the room after the interview, he went at once to his
carriage.

"To Court Lodge," he said to Thomas.

"To Court Lodge," said Thomas to the coachman as he mounted the box;
"an' you may depend on it, things is taking a uniggspected turn."

When the carriage stopped at Court Lodge, Cedric was in the drawing-room
with his mother.

The Earl came in without being announced. He looked an inch or so
taller, and a great many years younger. His deep eyes flashed.

"Where," he said, "is Lord Fauntleroy?"

Mrs. Errol came forward, a flush rising to her cheek.

"Is it Lord Fauntleroy?" she asked. "Is it, indeed?"

The Earl put out his hand and grasped hers.

"Yes," he answered, "it is."

Then he put his other hand on Cedric's shoulder.

"Fauntleroy," he said in his unceremonious, authoritative way, "ask your
mother when she will come to us at the Castle."

Fauntleroy flung his arms around his mother's neck.

"To live with us!" he cried. "To live with us always!"

The Earl looked at Mrs. Errol, and Mrs. Errol looked at the Earl. His
lordship was entirely in earnest. He had made up his mind to waste no
time in arranging this matter. He had begun to think it would suit him
to make friends with his heir's mother.

"Are you quite sure you want me?" said Mrs. Errol, with her soft, pretty
smile.

"Quite sure," he said bluntly. "We have always wanted you, but we were
not exactly aware of it. We hope you will come."




                             CHAPTER XV.
                         HIS EIGHTH BIRTHDAY.


Ben took his boy and went back to his cattle ranch in California, and he
returned under very comfortable circumstances. Just before his going,
Mr. Havisham had an interview with him in which the lawyer told him that
the Earl of Dorincourt wished to do something for the boy who might have
turned out to be Lord Fauntleroy. And so when Ben went away, he went as
the prospective master of a ranch which would be almost as good as his
own, and might easily become his own in time, as indeed it did in the
course of a few years; and Tom, the boy, grew up on it into a fine young
man and was devotedly fond of his father; and they were so successful
and happy that Ben used to say that Tom made up to him for all the
troubles he had ever had.

But Dick and Mr. Hobbs--who had actually come over with the others to
see that things were properly looked after--did not return for some
time. It had been decided at the outset that the Earl would provide for
Dick, and would see that he received a solid education; and Mr. Hobbs
had decided that as he himself had left a reliable substitute in charge
of his store, he could afford to wait to see the festivities which were
to celebrate Lord Fauntleroy's eighth birthday. All the tenantry were
invited, and there were to be feasting and dancing and games in the
park, and bonfires and fireworks in the evening.

"Just like the Fourth of July!" said Lord Fauntleroy. "It seems a pity
my birthday wasn't on the Fourth, doesn't it? For then we could keep
them both together."

What a grand day it was when little Lord Fauntleroy's birthday arrived,
and how his young lordship enjoyed it! How beautiful the park looked,
filled with the thronging people dressed in their gayest and best, and
with the flags flying from the tents and the top of the Castle! Nobody
had stayed away who could possibly come, because everybody was really
glad that little Lord Fauntleroy was to be little Lord Fauntleroy still,
and some day was to be the master of everything. Every one wanted to
have a look at him, and at his pretty, kind mother, who had made so many
friends.

What scores and scores of people there were under the trees, and in the
tents, and on the lawns! Farmers and farmers' wives in their Sunday
suits and bonnets and shawls; children frolicking and chasing about; and
old dames in red cloaks gossiping together. At the Castle, there were
ladies and gentlemen who had come to see the fun, and to congratulate
the Earl, and to meet Mrs. Errol. Lady Lorridaile and Sir Harry were
there, and Mr. Havisham, of course.

Everybody looked after little Lord Fauntleroy. And the sun shone and the
flags fluttered and the games were played and the dances danced, and as
the gaieties went on and the joyous afternoon passed, his little
lordship was simply radiantly happy.

The whole world seemed beautiful to him.

There was some one else who was happy too,--an old man, who, though he
had been rich and noble all his life, had not often been very honestly
happy. Perhaps, indeed, I shall tell you that I think it was because he
was rather better than he had been that he was rather happier. He had
not, indeed, suddenly become as good as Fauntleroy thought him; but, at
least, he had begun to love something, and he had several times found a
sort of pleasure in doing the kind things which the innocent, kind
little heart of a child had suggested,--and that was a beginning. And
every day he had been more pleased with his son's wife. He liked to hear
her sweet voice and to see her sweet face; and as she sat in his
arm-chair, he used to watch her and listen as he talked to her boy; and
he heard loving, gentle words which were new to him, and he began to see
why the little fellow who had lived in a New York side street and known
grocery-men and made friends with boot-blacks, was still so well-bred
and manly a little fellow that he made no one ashamed of him, even when
fortune changed him into the heir to an English earldom, living in an
English castle.

As the old Earl of Dorincourt looked at him that day, moving about the
park among the people, talking to those he knew and making his ready
little bow when any one greeted him, entertaining his friends Dick and
Mr. Hobbs, or standing near his mother listening to their conversation,
the old nobleman was very well satisfied with him. And he had never been
better satisfied than he was when they went down to the biggest tent,
where the more important tenants of the Dorincourt estate were sitting
down to the grand collation of the day.

They were drinking toasts; and, after they had drunk the health of the
Earl with much more enthusiasm than his name had ever been greeted with
before, they proposed the health of "Little Lord Fauntleroy." And if
there had ever been any doubt at all as to whether his lordship was
popular or not, it would have been settled that instant. Such a clamour
of voices and such a rattle of glasses and applause!

Little Lord Fauntleroy was delighted. He stood and smiled, and made
bows, and flushed rosy red with pleasure up to the roots of his bright
hair.

"Is it because they like me, Dearest?" he said to his mother. "Is it
Dearest? I'm so glad!"

And then the Earl put his hand on the child's shoulder and said to him:

"Fauntleroy, say to them that you thank them for their kindness."

Fauntleroy gave a glance up at him and then at his mother.

"Must I?" he asked just a trifle shyly, and she smiled, and nodded. And
so he made a little step forward, and everybody looked at him--such a
beautiful, innocent little fellow he was, too, with his brave, trustful
face!--and he spoke as loudly as he could, his childish voice ringing
out quite clear and strong.

"I'm ever so much obliged to you!" he said, "and--I hope you'll enjoy my
birthday--because I've enjoyed it so much--and--I'm very glad I'm going
to be an earl--I didn't think at first I should like it, but now I
do--and I love this place so, and I think it is beautiful--and--and--and
when I am an earl, I am going to try to be as good as my grandfather."

And amid the shouts and clamour of applause, he stepped back with a
little sigh of relief, and put his hand into the Earl's and stood close
to him, smiling and leaning against his side.

                   *       *       *       *       *

And that would be the very end of my story; but I must add one curious
piece of information, which is that Mr. Hobbs became so fascinated with
high life and was so reluctant to leave his young friend that he
actually sold his corner store in New York, and settled in the English
village of Erlesboro, where he opened a shop which was patronized by the
Castle and consequently was a great success. And about ten years after,
when Dick, who had finished his education and was going to visit his
brother in California, asked the good grocer if he did not wish to
return to America, he shook his head seriously.

"Not to live there," he said. "Not to live there; I want to be near
_him_. It's a good enough country for them that's young an stirrin'--but
there's faults in it. There's not an auntsister among 'em--nor an earl!"




                             Anmerkungen.


     (Vor den Anmerkungen bezeichnen _fette_ Zahlen die _Seiten_,
                       _magere_ die _Zeilen_.)

¶2¶, 31/32. _fits of petulance_, Zornesausbrüche.

¶3¶, 13. _he sold his commission._ Die commissions (Patente) für
Offiziersstellen bis zum Oberstleutnant waren bis zum Jahre 1871
käuflich, konnten also auch verkauft werden. -- 20. _cheap_, schlicht,
einfach. -- 35/36. _this ... quaint little way_, diese drollige Art und
Weise. -- 38/39. _quaint little ways_, wunderliche Einfälle.

¶4¶, 3. _hearth-rug_, Teppich vor dem Kamin. Der englische Kamin ist
eine offene in einer Wandvertiefung befindliche Feuerstelle; in besseren
Häusern ist er mit schönen Fayenceplatten oder Marmorwandungen
bekleidet, deren oberen Abschluß ein vorstehendes Kamingesims bildet.
Auf diesem werden allerhand Schmuckgegenstände (Vasen, Leuchter, Uhren
usw.) aufgestellt, darüber befindet sich häufig ein großer Spiegel. --
13. _Ristycratic_ = aristocratic. -- 21. _store_ = shop, ist ein
Amerikanismus. -- 27. _the topics of the hour_, die Tagesereignisse. --
28/29. _the Fourth of July._ Am 4. Juli 1776 erfolgte die
Unabhängigkeitserklärung (Declaration of Independence [Z. 36]) der
dreizehn englischen Kolonien Virginia, Massachusetts, New-Hampshire,
Conne(c)ticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland, South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia vom
Mutterlande. Schon im Jahre vorher hatte der nordamerikanische
Freiheitskampf (the Revolution [Z. 32]) mit der Schlacht bei Bunkershill
(17. Juni 1775), wo die Engländer nur mit den größten Verlusten siegten,
begonnen.

¶5¶, 2. _Washington_, im Distrikt Columbia, ist die Bundeshauptstadt der
Vereinigten Staaten und seit 1800 Sitz der Regierung und des Kongresses.
Die Stadt erhielt ihren Namen zur Erinnerung an den ersten Präsidenten
und Bundesfeldherrn George Washington (1732-1799); vgl. ¶13¶, 16. -- 17.
_darlint_ = darling. -- 18. _wantin'_ = wanting; _yez_ = you. -- 22.
_coupé_, zweisitziger Wagen; das Wort ist französisch zu sprechen.

¶6¶, 3. _unreal_, unwahrscheinlich.

¶7¶, 14/15. _to break the news_, die Nachricht mitzuteilen. -- 16.
_Hello_ = halloo! -- _Mornin'_ = morning. -- 32. _We was_ ist vulgär für
we were.

¶8¶, 7. _mercury_ = heat.

¶9¶, 3. _I'll be--jiggered_, etwa: Mich soll der Kuckuck holen. Jigger
ist die englische Form für chigoe, chico der Eingeborenen Westindiens,
und bedeutet einen Sandfloh, der sich unter dem Nagel des Fußes
eingräbt, dort Eier legt und böse Geschwüre hervorruft. -- 18. _you
was_; vgl. ¶7¶, 32.

¶10¶, 10. _home like_, traulich, wohnlich. -- 27. _cleared his throat_,
räusperte sich.

¶11¶, 28. _fiery-tempered_, hitzig, aufbrausend.

¶13¶, 16. _George Washington_, geb. 1732 in Virginien, ist der Begründer
der Unabhängigkeit der Vereinigten Staaten. Am 3. Januar 1777 schlug er
als Obergeneral der Kolonialtruppen den englischen General Cornwallis
bei Princeton in New Jersey und zwang 1781 die Besatzung von New York
zur Übergabe. Er war der erste Bundespräsident (1789), legte 1797 sein
Amt nieder und starb 1799. -- 25. _int'rust_ = interest. -- 26. _cur'us_
= curious. -- 36. _'vantage_ = advantage.

¶14¶, 16. _street-cars_, Trambahnwagen. -- 30. _un_ = one. -- 41.
_square_ = of an open, fair character, ehrlich.

¶15¶, 3. _start ... out fair_, schön ausstatten. -- 11. _meerschaum_,
spr. mèer-shoum.

¶16¶, 3. _Michael_, spr. mi-kl. -- 11. _that you have realised_, ob Sie
sich vergegenwärtigt haben.

¶17¶, 25. _greenbacks_ werden die Banknoten der Vereinigten Staaten nach
der grünen Farbe ihrer Rückseite genannt. -- 27. _he tore_, er eilte. --
32. _twinty-foive_ = twenty-five. -- _Where's_ = where is.

¶18¶, 17. _chubby_, rund. -- 32. _realise_; vgl. ¶16¶, 11. -- 37. _his
nearest wishes_, seine Herzenswünsche.

¶19¶, 1. _he proceeded to gratify them_, er ging an ihre Befriedigung.
-- 17. _cut_ = hurt. -- 30. _struck him dumb_, machte ihn sprachlos.

¶20¶, 10. _ye wasn't goin'_; vgl. ¶7¶, 32; _ye_, vulgäre Form für you.
-- 13. _Thanky_ = thank you; _fur_ = for; _wot_ = what.

¶22¶, 2. _I made_ = I gained, ich verdiente. -- _kin_ = can. -- 3.
_hankercher_ = handkerchief. -- 7. _he panted_, sagte er keuchend.

¶24¶, 10. _tops'les_ = topsails, Marssegel. -- _mains'les_ = mainsails,
Hauptsegel. -- 11. _a nautical flavour_, einen seemännischen Anstrich.

¶25¶, 1. _stags' antlers_, Hirschgeweihe. -- 9. _shabby_, ärmlich.

¶26¶, 15. _shaggy_, buschig. -- 36. _Straight-limbed_, hat er seine
geraden Glieder?

¶27¶, 9. _to settle on her_, ihr auszusetzen. -- 15. _ejaculated_, rief
aus. -- 22. _snapped_, stieß heraus. -- 29. _blustered my lord_,
polterte seine Lordschaft heraus.

¶28¶, 6. _deep-set_, tief liegend. -- 7. _beetling_, hier: buschig.

¶29¶, 7. _had struck up an acquaintance_, hatte sich bekannt gemacht. --
24. _greenery_, Blätterwerk. -- 31. _Central Park_ ist der größte Park
New Yorks und einer der großartigsten der Welt. Er wurde 1857 in Angriff
genommen und enthält auf einer Fläche von 342 ha herrliche gärtnerische
Anlagen mit großen künstlichen Teichen, einem zoologischen Garten, einem
großen Museum und der 1881 vom Millionär Vanderbilt der Stadt
geschenkten Nadel der Kleopatra, dem berühmten Obelisken aus Alexandria.

¶30¶, 7. _fairy-book_, Märchenbuch. -- 15. _rich_, schwer. -- _plain_,
glatt.

¶31¶, 2. _diamond-paned windows_, Fenster mit Butzenscheiben. -- 18.
_sir_ wird häufig dem Hunde gegenüber als drohender Zuruf gebraucht,
wenn er etwas Unrechtes getan hat. -- 27. _love-locks_, lange Locke.

¶32¶, 18. _ever so much_, gar so sehr.

¶33¶, 12. _square_; vgl. ¶14¶, 41. -- 21. _professional_, von Beruf.

¶34¶, 1. _plain_, offenbar. -- 8. _worldly_, selbstsüchtig. -- 16.
_genial_, munter, heiter. -- 35/36. _was violently sworn at_, bekam
einen derben Fluch zu hören. -- 36/37. _when his lordship had an extra
twinge of gout_, wenn die Gicht seiner Herrlichkeit einen
außergewöhnlichen Schmerz bereitete.

¶35¶, 13. _he panted_; vgl. ¶22¶, 7. -- 14. _I'm all right_, ich kann es
ganz gut.

¶36¶, 11. _He kept looking at him_, er blickte ihn fortgesetzt an. --
28. _wistfully_, nachdenklich.

¶38¶, 34. _close_, innigste, vertrauteste.

¶39¶, 22. _ivy-entwined_, efeuumrankt.

¶40¶, 33. _there's no knowing_ = one can (does) not know.

¶41¶, 16. _rugs_; vgl. ¶4¶, 3. -- 22. _catching his breath a little_,
schnell aufatmend.

¶42¶, 4. _ever so much_; vgl. ¶32¶, 18. -- 11. _base-ball_ ist ein
amerikanisches Ballspiel für 18 Personen, 9 auf jeder Seite.

[Illustration:
               O

               II
     L         .        R
              /:\
             / : \
            /  :  \
        S  /   :   \
          /    :    \
         /     :     \
        /      :      \
   III <       :P.     > I
        \      :      /
         \     :     /
          \    :    /
     Y     \   :   /    X
            \  :  /
             \ : /
              \:/
               .
               H

               C
]

Es wird ein Quadrat abgesteckt, welches _diamond_ (Raute oder carreau)
heißt und dessen Seiten je 90 Fuß lang sind. An den Ecken sind die
_bases_ (Male), welche _home_ (Ziel) oder _home base_ _[H]_, _first
base_ _[I]_, _second base_ _[II]_ und _third base_ _[III]_ heißen. Die
Spieler stellen sich um das Quadrat herum auf. Hinter _H_ steht der
_catcher_ (Fänger) _[C]_; der _pitcher_ (Werfer) _[P]_ steht auf der
Linie _H II_ 50 Fuß von _H_ entfernt; die drei _basemen_ (Malmänner)
stehen neben _I_, _II_, _III_. Der _shortstop_ _[S]_ (Aufhalter) steht
zwischen _II_ und _III_. Ferner stehen noch 3 _fielders_ d. h.
Mitglieder der nicht an der Reihe befindlichen Partei _R_ (right
fielder), O (centre fielder), _L_ (left fielder) in einiger Entfernung
hinter und auf beiden Seiten von _II_. Der _pitcher_ wirft den Ball über
das _home_ dem _catcher_ zu, während ein Mann der Partei, welche in (=
am Spiel) oder _at the bat_ (= am Schlagholz) ist, neben dem _home_
steht und den vom _pitcher_ geworfenen Ball, ehe er zum _catcher_
gelangt, mit seinem Schlagholz zu treffen sucht. Schlägt er denselben in
die Luft und fängt ihn einer der Gegenpartei auf, bevor er zu Boden
fällt, so ist der Schlagende _out_ oder _caught out_ (d. h. er muß den
Schlägel einem andern Spieler seiner Partei abtreten). Fällt der
geschlagene Ball außerhalb der Linien _H I_ oder _H III_ oder ihrer
Verlängerung, z. B. nach _X_ oder _Y_, so ist der Schlag _foul_
(ungültig) und wird nicht gezählt, außer wenn der Ball vor dem
Niederfallen aufgefangen wird, worauf der _striker_ oder _batter_
ebenfalls _out_ wird. Wird aber der Ball innerhalb der genannten Linien
d. h. in den _diamond_ geschlagen, so muß der Schläger zunächst nach
_I_, dann der Reihe nach über _II_ und _III_ nach _H_ zurücklaufen.
Gelingt ihm dies, so wird ihm ein _run_ (Lauf) angerechnet. Wird aber
der Ball von einem bei _I_ stehenden Spieler aufgefangen, bevor der
Schläger dahin gelangt, oder wird dieser während seines Laufes von einem
Gegner mit dem Ball berührt, so ist der Schläger _out_. Sind drei
Schläger derselben Partei _out_ gemacht, so ist ein _inning_ (Reihe)
vorüber und die Gegenpartei kommt an die Reihe. Das Spiel besteht aus 9
_innings_ für jede Partei, und jene Partei hat gewonnen, welche
innerhalb ihrer _innings_ die meisten _runs_ gemacht hat. -- 14. _I'm
afraid I don't_, ich fürchte, nein. -- 34. _There was a smile lurking_,
es spielte ein Lächeln.

¶43¶, 26. _flavour_, einen besonderen Reiz. -- 28. _on that particular
morning_, gerade an jenem Morgen. -- 30. _curly-headed_, lockenköpfig.
-- 37/38. _he almost fell back a pace_, er prallte fast einen Schritt
zurück.

¶44¶, 6. _tenantry_, Pachtleute. -- 25/26. _there was a stir of
gratified pride_, es regte sich ein Gefühl befriedigten Stolzes.

¶45¶, 11. _plainly_, offenbar. -- 22. _rent_, Pachtzins. -- 27. _catch
up_, sich empor arbeiten. -- 29. _black_, finster. -- 39. _to strengthen
his plea_, seine Bitte zu unterstützen.

¶46¶, 5. _low_, schwach, entkräftet. -- 13. _deep-set_; vgl. ¶28¶, 6. --
35. _he realised_; vgl. ¶16¶, 11.

¶48¶, 7. _Higgins is not to be interfered with_, gegen Higgins soll
nicht eingeschritten werden. -- 17/18. _the corners of his ... a
little_, es zuckte ein wenig um seine Mundwinkel. -- 25. _rispecferly_ =
respectfully. -- 33. _that's the way with_, so geht es mit.

¶49¶, 6. _pleasanter_ = more pleasant (Umgangssprache). 30. _to be
brought round_ = to be brought.

¶50¶, 12. _he kept saying_, sagte er immer wieder. -- 25. _dumfounded_,
verblüfft (familiär).

¶51¶, 32. _startled_, erschrocken. -- 34. _they scurried away_, sie
eilten davon. -- _the whirr_, das Aufstreichen.

¶52¶, 23. _bowled_, dahingerollt. -- 33. _brusquely_, kurz, barsch.

¶53¶, 6. _flash over the ground_, über den Boden hin eilen. -- 12.
_dashed up_, sprang hinauf. -- 25. _apple-cheeked_, rotwangig.

¶54¶, 13. _over their ... shopping_, bei ihrem Tee und ihren Einkäufen.

¶55¶, 4. _curtsy_ = courtesy; _a bobbing curtsy_, ein schneller Knix.
22. _mop_, Büschel, Fülle. -- 26. _over again_, vom Scheitel bis zur
Sohle, von oben bis unten.

¶56¶, 10. _aisle_ (spr. il), Chor. -- _red-cushioned and curtained_, mit
roten Kissen und Vorhängen versehen. -- 13. _across the church_,
gegenüber in der Kirche. -- 22. _lyethe_ = lies; _ye_ = the; _bodye_ =
body. -- 23. _allsoe_ = also. -- 25. _devoured_, verzehrt, gequält. --
33. _church service_, ergänze: book. Seit dem Jahre 1589 ist für die
englische Staatskirche (Church of England) ein gemeinsames Gebetbuch
(The Book of Common Prayer, Common Prayer Book) eingeführt. -- 40.
_curtain-shielded_, durch Vorhänge geschützt, verborgen.

¶57¶, 35. _careworn_, von Kummer durchfurcht.

¶58¶, 17. _a trifle taken aback_, ein wenig verblüfft. -- 25. _broke
in_, unterbrach, fiel ein.

¶59¶, 23. _arched_, bog. -- 38. _leading-rein_, Leitzügel.

¶60¶, 15. _set_, festgeschlossen. -- 22. _Want_ = do you want?

¶61¶, 3. _he panted_; vgl. ¶22¶, 7. -- 11. _snatch off_, schnell
abnehmen. -- 19. _An'_ = and. -- _I'm blessed_, hol' mich der Kuckuck.
-- 23. _ses_ = says. -- 25. _trudges_, schlendert. -- 28. _what's up_,
was los ist, was es gibt. -- _he whips off_, er zieht schnell ab.

¶62¶, 22. _closely_, treu, sorgsam. -- 38/39. _which had set ...
perfection_, welche ihn den Gipfel der Vollkommenheit hatte erreichen
lassen.

¶63¶, 3. _brougham_ (sprich: broù-am oder bròom), leichter,
geschlossener, zwei- oder vierrädriger Wagen, benannt nach Lord
Brougham, einem berühmten Staatsmann und Redner. -- 6. _abruptly_, kurz.
-- 39. _dont_ = don't. -- 40. _granfarther_ = grandfather. -- _plees_ =
please. -- 41. _afechshnet_ = affectionate.

¶65¶, 18. _dashed off_, dahinjagte. -- 21. _such a dash_, solch' ein
schneller Ritt.

¶66¶, 17. _on his mind_, auf dem Herzen. -- 21. _Been ... he_ = Has he
been neglecting it? -- 26. _horror-stricken_, von Schrecken erfüllt.

¶69¶, 10. _crazy_, baufällig, elend. -- 21/22. _to talk him over_, über
ihn zu reden.

¶70¶, 12. _scrambled up_, krabbelte in die Höhe, erhob sich langsam.

¶71¶, 12. _Sir_ ist ein Titel, welchen die Baronets und Knights
(Squires) vor ihrem Vornamen führen; vgl. ¶81¶, 8. 15. _and set Mrs.
Dibble's ... madly again_, und der Frau Dibble Ladenglocke immer wie
toll klingeln ließ. -- 19. _dimpled peachy cheeks_, Grübchen in den
frischen roten Wangen.

¶72¶, 14. _Vandyke collar_ wird ein ausgezackter Spitzenhalskragen
genannt, wie man sie auf den Gemälden des niederländischen Malers Van
Dyck, welcher 1461 starb, sieht. -- 33. _eszackly_ = exactly.

¶73¶, 13. _course_, Vorgehen, Handlungsweise. -- 30. _in a measure_ = in
some measure, gewissermaßen.

¶74¶, 7/8. _how closely those ... to each other_, wie innige Zuneigung
die beiden zueinander gefaßt hatten.

¶75¶, 5. _methodic_, steif, ruhig. -- 27. _ever so much_; vgl. ¶32¶, 18.

¶76¶, 22. _clutched_, faßte krampfhaft. -- 29. _chambers_, Schreibstube,
Kanzlei.

¶77¶, 4/5. _a low, scoundrelly piece of business_, eine gemeine,
schurkige Geschichte. -- 13. _fastidious_, stolz, vornehm. -- 17. _drops
of moisture_, Schweißtropfen.

¶79¶, 10. _that read_, auf dem zu lesen war. -- 31. _Want a shine?_
Stiefel wichsen? -- 33. _rest_, Wichsbank. -- 35. _fell to work_, machte
sich an die Arbeit. -- 40. _feller_ = fellow.

¶80¶, 7. _boss_ (o = a in all), Herr, Meister, ist ein Amerikanismus. --
_yerself_ = yourself (vulgär). -- 11. _lifetime acquaintances_, Freunde
von jeher. -- 17. _ha'_ = have (vulgär). -- 28. _tilted_, gelehnt. --
30. _he made a jerk at them with the hand_, deutete er mit der Hand auf
sie. -- 40. _ginger ale_ ist ein moussierendes Getränk wie gingerbeer
(Ingwerbier), welches aus gärendem Ingwer, cream-of-tartar (Schaum einer
kochenden Weinsteinlösung) und Zucker mit Hefe und Wasser bereitet wird.

¶81¶, 1. _Here's to him!_ Dies auf sein Wohl! -- 2. _markises_ =
marquesses. -- _dooks_ = dukes. -- 8. _the nobility and gentry_.
Nobility ist der Geburtsadel (Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount (spr. is =
i), Baron). Die Träger dieser Adelstitel sind Lords, ihre Frauen Ladies
(Anrede Mylord oder your Lordship, Mylady). Der nobility steht gegenüber
die _gentry_ (niederer Adel, auch Landadel vgl. ¶94¶, 10) mit den 2
Klassen der Baronets und Knights (Squires). Man rechnet jedoch zur
gentry im weiteren Sinne alle gentlemen, d. h. alle Gebildeten und in
vornehmer Lebensstellung Befindlichen. -- 9. _realised_ = known. -- 33.
_The Tower of London_, nach welchem die Erzählung von Ainsworth betitelt
ist, ist eine Gruppe von Gebäuden am nördlichen Ufer der Themse. Im
Innern desselben erhebt sich der von Wilhelm dem Eroberer erbaute White
Tower, welcher in früheren Zeiten als Staatsgefängnis benutzt wurde. Bis
ins 14. Jahrhundert war die Burg zuweilen auch der Sitz des königlichen
Hofes. -- 34. _Ainsworth_, William Harrison. geb. 1805 in Manchester,
gestorben 1882, ist der erste Vertreter der Räuber- und Schauerromane in
der englischen Literatur. Seine zahlreichen Romane (u. a. Crichton, Jack
Sheppard, Old St. Paul's) wurden viel gelesen. -- 38. _Bloody Mary_
wurde die Königin Maria I. von England (1553-1558) wegen ihrer blutigen
und grausamen Verfolgung der Protestanten genannt.

¶82¶, 3. _ain't_ = is not (vulgär). -- 8. _this 'ere un_ = this one
(vulgär). -- _that's bossin'_, welche leitet, ist ein Amerikanismus;
vgl. ¶80¶, 7. -- 33. _gal_ = girl (vulgär). -- 34. _'n'_ = and. --
35/36. _to set up a cattle ranch_, um einen Viehhandel zu beginnen; vgl.
¶98¶, 2. -- 37. _'ve_ = have.

¶83¶, 1. _afore_ = before. -- 4/5. _That's ... from_, von ihm und keinem
andern kommt er (der Brief). -- 14. _curous_ = curious. -- 26. _preaps_
= perhaps. -- 27. _thort_ = thought. -- 28. _right away_, sofort. --
_intrusted_ = interested. -- 39/40. _There is no knowing_, das kann man
nicht wissen. -- 42. _a put-up job_, eine abgekartete Geschichte
(familiär). -- _'ristycrats_; vgl. ¶4¶, 13.

¶85¶, 5. _exclaimed_, äußerten sich laut. -- 13. _holding on to his
knee_, die Hände um die Kniee geschlungen. -- 15. _sober_, besonnen,
ruhig. -- 37. _jumped_, aufsprang.

¶86¶, 2/3. _was all alight with eagerness_, leuchtete ganz vor Spannung.
-- 9. _by George_ ist eine in der englischen aristokratischen
Gesellschaft deshalb gebrauchte Beteuerungsformel, weil der heilige
Ritter Georg der Patron des höchsten englischen Ordens, des von Eduard
III. 1350 gestifteten Hosenbandordens (Order of the Garter), ist. -- 24.
_drawing his breath hard_, mühsam atmend. -- 33. _how deep a hold upon
him ... had taken_, wie tief ... Wurzel gefaßt hatten.

¶87¶, 11. _walks_, Kreise, Klassen. -- 35. _morning room_, Boudoir. --
38. _hisself_ = himself. -- _ma'am_ = madam.

¶88¶, 8. _uplifted eyes_, auf ihn gerichteten Augen.

¶89¶, 9. _sardonically_, spöttisch. -- 39. _glaring down at her_, sie
mit einem durchbohrenden Blick ansehend.

¶90¶, 16. _as it was to be_ = as it was new to him to be etc. -- 21/22.
_he found her a little soothing_, er fand in ihr einigen Trost. -- 37.
_almost stricken dumb_, fast sprachlos vor Erstaunen.

¶91¶, 9. _until his head was in a whirl_, bis ihm ganz wirr im Kopfe
war. -- 17. _Seem's like_ = it seems as if. -- _orter_ = ought to.

¶92¶, 1. _the Right Honourable_, ist eine Bezeichnung, die den Earls,
Viscounts und Barons, sowie ihren Frauen zukommt; ferner den Mitgliedern
des Privy Council (des Geheimen Staatsrates) d. h. den Ministern in und
außer Dienst, Erzbischöfen u. a. -- 14. _better'n_ = better than. -- 25.
_aint_; vgl. ¶82¶, 3. -- 27. _You may eat me_, ich lasse mich hängen. --
28. _anywheres_ = any where. -- _so'd_ = so would. -- _Jest ax_ = just
ask. -- 31. _knowed_ = knew. -- 32. _they done it_ = they have done it.
-- 33. _'Merican_ = American. -- 34. _She done_ = she has done. -- 35.
_I'll tell yer wot come to me_, ich will Ihnen sagen, was mir
eingefallen ist. -- 36. _minnit_ = minute. -- _pictur_ = picture. -- _o'
them papers_ = of those papers.

¶93¶, 14. _feller_ = fellow. -- _give_ = gave. -- 16. _knows_ = know. --
21. _in care of_, unter der Obhut. -- 22. _he struggled into his coat_,
er schlüpfte eilig in seinen Rock. -- 27. _spare_, frei, übrig. -- 36.
_a big thing_, eine wichtige Sache.

¶94¶, 10. _Esq._ = Esquire entspricht heutzutage in England dem
deutschen Hochwohlgeboren und wird regelmäßig auf Adressen dem Namen
eines gentleman (vgl. ¶81¶, 8) nachgesetzt, wenn nicht bei demselben
schon M(iste)r oder ein Titel (Doctor, Rev. = Reverend u. a.) steht.

¶95¶, 12. _to cable_, (durch das unterseeische Kabel) telegraphieren. --
21. _sharp faced_, mit pfiffigem Gesichte. -- 37. _I can swear to her_,
ich kann beschwören, daß sie es ist.

¶96¶, 4. _He is done with you_, er ist mit dir fertig. -- 25. _fairly_ =
completely. -- 34. _dashed past him_, stürzte an ihm vorbei.

¶97¶, 6. _is_ = are. -- _a uniggspected_ = an unexpected.

¶98¶, 2. _ranch_ (span. rancho, Gesellschaft, Kameradschaft) ist in
Amerika gebraucht für: 1) leicht gebaute Hütte der Viehhirten, 2)
Viehwirtschaft, wie hier. -- 8. _prospective_, voraussichtlich,
zukünftig. -- 12/13. _was devotedly fond of_, hing mit ganzem Herzen an.
-- 14. _made up to him_, entschädigte ihn.

¶99¶, 19. _was simply radiantly happy_, strahlte einfach vor Glück.

¶100¶, 20. _settled_, entschieden. -- 23. _flushed rosy red_, wurde
dunkelrot.

¶101¶, 23. _that's_ = that are. -- _stirrin'_, rührig. -- 25.
_auntsister_ = ancestor.




                             Verzeichnis
                    zu den sachlichen Anmerkungen.


   (Die Zahlen bezeichnen die Seiten und Zeilen im Texte, zu denen
                eine Anmerkung im Anhang gegeben ist.)

   Ainsworth 81,34
   base-ball 42,11
   Bloody-Mary 81,38
   brougham 63,3
   Central Park 29,31
   church-service 56,33
   commission 3,13
   Esquire 94,10
   Fourth of July 4,28
   gentry 81,8
   George, by 86,9
   ginger ale 80,40
   greenbacks 17,25
   hearth 4,3
   jiggered 9,3
   nobility 81,8
   ranch 98,2
   Right Honourable 92,1
   sir, Sir 31,18; 71,12
   Tower (the) of London 81,33
   Vandyke collar 72,14
   Washington (Stadt) 5,2
   Washington, George 13,16




            Die Französische und Englische Schulbibliothek


erscheint seit dem 1. Oktober 1883; sie ist eine Sammlung der besten
französischen und englischen Schriftsteller vom 17. bezw. 16.
Jahrhundert an bis in die neueste Zeit.

Bezüglich der äußeren Ausstattung sei folgendes bemerkt:

a) Die _Schrift_ entspricht _allen von medizinisch-pädagogischen
Vereinen gestellten Anforderungen_; sie ist groß, scharf und deutlich
lesbar wegen des richtigen Verhältnisses zwischen Höhe der großen und
kleinen Buchstaben unter sich und zwischen Buchstabenhöhe und Entfernung
der einzelnen Zeilen. _Selbst schwache Augen dürften lange Zeit ohne
Ermüdung diese Schrift lesen können._

b) Das _Papier_ ist ein eigens hierzu angefertigter, kräftiger, nicht
durchscheinender, guter Stoff von gelblicher Färbung, _die sehr
wohltuend auf das Auge des Schülers wirkt_.

c) Der _Einband ist biegsam und dauerhaft_.




                              Prospekt.


Die »¶Französische und Englische Schulbibliothek¶«, aufgebaut auf den
Thesen der Direktoren-Versammlung in der Provinz Hannover (1882), ist
den Anforderungen _der Lehrpläne und Lehraufgaben für die höheren
Schulen vom Jahre 1901 genau angepaßt_. Sie bringt nicht nur die
wichtigeren Schriftwerke der letzten drei bezw. vier Jahrhunderte und
führt somit in die Literatur, Kultur- und Volkskunde der beiden großen
Kulturvölker ein (Lehrpläne und Lehraufgaben von 1901, S. 37 u. 38),
sondern sie berücksichtigt auch die _technisch-wissenschaftliche
Lektüre_ und wird so _den weitgehendsten Forderungen der Gymnasien und
Realanstalten_ gerecht.

Folgende Grundsätze sind für die Gestaltung derselben maßgebend.

1. _Die Schulbibliothek_ bringt _Prosa_ und _Poesie_. Die _Prosa_bände
enthalten den Lesestoff für je ein _Halbjahr_. Mit Ausnahme _der
Lebensbeschreibungen_ berühmter Männer, welche, _ohne Beeinträchtigung
des Gesamtbildes_, zweckentsprechend gekürzt erscheinen, _werden nur
Teile eines Ganzen veröffentlicht, die, in sich aber eine Art Ganzes
bildend_, eine hinreichende Bekanntschaft mit den Geisteswerken und
deren Verfassern ermöglichen.

2. Vor _jedem_ Bande erscheint eine dem Gesichtskreis des Schülers
entsprechende _Lebensbeschreibung_ des Schriftstellers sowie eine kurze
Zusammenstellung _alles dessen, was zu seinem vollen Verständnis zu
wissen nötig scheint_. Den _poetischen_ Bänden gehen außerdem eine
_metrische_ und eine _sprachliche_ Einleitung voran, die sich streng an
das betreffende Stück anlehnen.

3. Der _Text_ ist bei den _Prosaikern_ der Übersichtlichkeit halber in
kürzere Kapitel geteilt.

4. Der _Rechtschreibung_ in den _französischen_ Bänden liegt die Ausgabe
des _Dictionnaire de l'Académie_ von _1877_ zugrunde.

5. Die _Anmerkungen_ sind _deutsch_; sie stehen von Band _100_ an und in
den neuen Auflagen früher erschienener Bände _hinter_ dem Texte. Bei
Bänden, von denen auch oder nur _einsprachige Ausgaben_ (französisch
bezw. englisch) erschienen sind, ist dies im Verzeichnis besonders
angegeben.

6. Die sachliche _Erklärung_ bringt das _Notwendige_ ohne _gelehrtes_
Beiwerk. _Sprachliche Anmerkungen_ finden sich da, wo eine Eigenheit in
der Ausdrucksweise des Schriftstellers vorliegt; die _Grammatik_ wird
nur ganz _ausnahmsweise_ behandelt, wenn sich die Schwierigkeit einer
Stelle durch die nicht leicht bemerkbare Unterordnung unter eine
grammatische Regel heben läßt. Auf eine bestimmte Grammatik ist nicht
hingewiesen. Die _Synonymik_ ist _nicht_ berücksichtigt. _Soll dieselbe
ihren Zweck als formales Bildungsmittel nicht verfehlen, so muß da, wo
das Verständnis des Textes und die Wahl des richtigen Ausdrucks selbst
eine synonymische Aufklärung erheischen, diese gemeinschaftlich von den
Schülern gesucht und unter der unmittelbaren Einwirkung des Lehrers
gefunden werden._ Aus _gleichen_ Gründen ist der _Etymologie kein Platz_
eingeräumt.

7. _Übersetzungen_, die nur der _Trägheit_ des Schülers
Vorschub leisten, sind ausgeschlossen. -- Die Herausgabe von
_Sonderwörterbüchern_ zu einzelnen Bänden hat sich als eine
_zwingende Notwendigkeit_ erwiesen; denn abgesehen davon, daß die
Konkurrenzunternehmungen derartige Wörterbücher veröffentlichen, welche
die Schüler _auf jeden Fall_ sich zu verschaffen wissen, sind auch an
die Schriftleitung seitens zahlreicher Amtsgenossen Zuschriften gelangt,
denen zufolge die namentlich für die _mittleren_ Klassen bestimmten
Ausgaben nur _mit einem Wörterbuche_ in Gebrauch genommen werden können,
weil _erst in den oberen Klassen_ auf die Anschaffung eines
Schulwörterbuches _gedrungen_ wird. Da _jedoch die Wörterbücher den
betreffenden Bänden nicht beigegeben sind, sondern erst auf Verlangen
nachgeliefert werden, so bedarf es nur eines Antrages seitens der
Schule, wenn das Sonderwörterbuch nicht geliefert werden soll_.

8. _Aussprachebezeichnungen_ werden hinzugefügt, wo die
Schulwörterbücher den Schüler im Stiche lassen; _sie fehlen_ bei den
_seltener_ vorkommenden _ausländischen Eigennamen_, weil die _gebildeten
Engländer und Franzosen_ bemüht sind, _dieselben so auszusprechen, wie
sie im Lande selbst ausgesprochen werden_.

9. Den _geschichtlichen_ Stoffen sind _Abbildungen_, _Karten_ und
_Pläne_ beigegeben; _Verzeichnisse_ zu den Anmerkungen erleichtern das
Zurechtfinden in einzelnen Bänden. --




           Verlag der Rengerschen Buchhandlung in Leipzig.


Im Verlage der Rengerschen Buchhandlung Gebhardt & Wilisch in Leipzig
sind erschienen oder im Erscheinen begriffen:




                               Buurmans
                          Kurze Repetitorien
                für das Einjährig-Freiwilligen-Examen
                                nebst
                          Muster-Prüfungen.


         Buurmans Repetitorien behandeln in 10 Bändchen alle
                         Prüfungsgegenstände.

   1.       Bändchen:  Deutsch                     (erschienen)
   2.           "      Lateinisch
   3.           "      Griechisch
   4.           "      Französisch                 (erschienen)
   5.           "      Englisch                          "
   6.           "      Geschichte                        "
   7.           "      Geographie                        "
   8.           "      Mathematik                        "
   9.           "      Physik                 (erscheint im Mai 1904)
   Anhang:             Prüfungsbestimmungen.

            Preis jedes Bändchens in Leinw. geb. 1 Mk. 50.

Diese Bändchen eignen sich nicht bloß für die Stufe des
Einjährigen-Examens, sondern sind auch für die höheren Prüfungen
zweckmäßig zu benutzen, um sich eine bedeutende Präsenz des Wissens
anzueignen.

        Jedes Bändchen ist einzeln im Buchhandel zu beziehen.

           Zum Gebrauch in höheren Schulen ist erschienen:




                      Monumentalplan von Berlin.


   Herausgeg. v. R. Gebhardt. Entworfen u. gezeichnet v. J. Aescher.
   Größe der Zeichnung 130x170 cm. Preis des in 5 Farben gedruckten
                               Planes:

   a)  roh -- 4 Blätter in Mappe                       8  Mk.
   b)  auf Leinwand aufgezogen mit Ösen in Mappe      14  Mk.
   c)  "                           Ringen und Stäben  15  Mk.

Monumentalplan von Berlin. Auf 32x38 cm Bildfläche verkleinerte Ausgabe
des Wandplanes von Berlin, in 5 Farben gedruckt, mit alphabetischem
Namensverzeichnis. Mk. 0.60.




                      Illustrated Map of London.


           Entworfen und herausgegeben von Ludwig E. Rolfs.
                   Größe der Zeichnung 132x172 cm.
             Preis des in fünf Farben kolorierten Planes:

   a)  roh -- 9 Blätter in Mappe                      16  Mk.
   b)  auf Leinwand aufgezogen mit Ösen in Mappe      22  Mk.
   c)  "                           Ringen und Stäben  24  Mk.

Gleichzeitig ist eine für die Hand des Schülers bestimmte, auf 32x42 cm
verkleinerte Ausgabe dieses Planes in mehrfachem Farbendruck
ausgeführt erschienen, deren Einzelpreis einschl. eines alphabet.
Namensverzeichnisses 60 Pf. beträgt.




                Plan Pittoresque de la Ville de Paris.


           Entworfen und herausgegeben von Ludwig E. Rolfs.
                   Größe der Zeichnung 132x176 cm.
             Preis des in fünf Farben kolorierten Planes:

   a)  roh -- 6 Blätter in Mappe                      16  Mk.
   b)  auf Leinwand aufgezogen mit Ösen in Mappe      22  Mk.
   c)  "                           Ringen und Stäben  24  Mk.

Hiervon ist ebenfalls eine auf 32 x 42 cm verkleinerte, für den Gebrauch
der Schüler bestimmte und in mehreren Farben gedruckte Ausgabe
erschienen unter dem Titel:




                Plan monumental de la Ville de Paris.


      In Umschlag mit alphabet. Namensverzeichnis. Preis 60 Pf.

     Kommentar hierzu Preis brosch. 3 Mk. 70 Pf. In Ganzleinwand
                            gebunden 4 Mk.




              Französische und Englische Schulbibliothek
              herausgegeben von Dr. Otto E. A. Dickmann,
             Direktor der Oberrealschule der Stadt Köln.


   Nach den Autoren alphabetisch geordnetes Verzeichnis der bisher
                         erschienenen Bände.
          Reihe A: Prosa -- Reihe B: Poesie -- Reihe C: für
                           Mädchenschulen.
    T. A.: Sammlung Französischer und Englischer Text-Ausgaben zum
                            Schulgebrauch.
      Zu den mit * bezeichneten Bänden ist ein Sonderwörterbuch
                             erschienen.

    Einsprachige Ausgaben (französisch bezw. englisch) siehe unter
    Barrau -- Conteurs -- Corneille, Le Cid -- Daudet, Tartarin --
       English School Life -- Goerlich -- Monod -- Shakespeare,
                             Coriolanus.

   Reihe.   Band
   A         49.  Addison, Sir Roger de Coverley. [Aus: The        0.90.
                     Spectator.] (Professor Dr. H. Fehse.) Mit 1
                     Karte.
   T.A.     *10.  Aladdin or The Wonderful Lamp.                   0.60.
   A         90.  Arago, Histoire de ma Jeunesse. (Prof. Dr. O.    1.20.
                     Klein.)
   A       *131.  Ascensions -- Voyages aériens -- Évasions.       1.30.
                     (Prof. Dr. Wershoven.)
   B         22.  Augier et Sandeau, Le Gendre de M. Poirier.      1.60.
                     (Prof. Dr. J. Sarrazin.) 4. Aufl.
   A        *72.  Aymeric, Dr. J., De Leipsic à Constantinople.    1.10.
                     Journal de route.
   A         20.  Barante, Jeanne Darc. (Dir. Prof. Dr. K.         1.40.
                     Mühlefeld.) 3. Aufl. Mit 2 Kärtchen und 2
                     Plänen.
   A         47.  Barrau, Scènes de la Révolution française.       1.50.
                     (Prof. Dr. B. Lengnick.) Mit 2 Plänen und 1
                     Karte. 4. Aufl.
                  Dasselbe. Mit französischen Anmerkungen          1.50.
   C          2.  Bersier, Mme, Les Myrtilles. Stufe II. (M.       0.70.
                     Mühry.)
   A        142.  Boissonnas, Une famille pendant la guerre        1.30.
                     1870/71. (Dr. Banner.)
   A        141.  The British Isles. (Dir. Prof. J. Leitritz.) 20  3.--.
                     Abbild. u. 1 Karte.
   A        *97.  Bruno, Francinet. (Prof. Dr. J. Sarrazin.) 2.    1.--.
                     Aufl.
   A       *115.  Bruno, Le Tour de la France. (Dir. Prof.         1.20.
                     Rolfs.) Mit 1 Karte.
   A        *77.  Burnett, Little Lord Fauntleroy. (Prof. G.       1.10.
                     Wolpert.) 7. Aufl.
   B         10.  Byron, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. [Ausw.]       1.40.
                     (Prof. Dr. R. Werner.)
   C        *25.  Candy, Emily J., Talk about Engl. Life or First  1.30.
                     Days in England. Stufe IV.
   C         14.  Carraud, Mme J., Contes. Stufe II. (Dr. Cl.      0.80.
                     Klöpper.)
   A       *132.  Chambers's English History. Mit 1 Karte.         1.30.
                     (Oberl. A. v. Roden.)
   B         26.  Chants d'Écoles. (Dir. Prof. Ludw. E. Rolfs u.   1.--.
                     Barthel Müller.)
   A       *109.  Chaucer Stories. (Dr. Cl. Klöpper.)              1.10.
   C         32.  Christie's Old Organ or Home, Sweet Home by      0.80.
                     Mrs. Walton. -- Daddy Darwins Dovecot by
                     Mrs. Ewing. (A. Bückmann).
   C          4.  Colomb, La Fille de Carilès. Stufe IV. (M.       0.90.
                     Mühry.) 7. Aufl.
   A       *122.  Contes d'Andersen, trad. par D. Soldi. (Dir.     1.--.
                     Prof. Dr. E. Penner.)
   C         40.  Contes, Trois, pour les petites filles. Stufe    0.70.
                     I. (Dr. Fr. Lotsch.)
   A        *69.  Conteurs modernes. [Jules Simon, Theuriet,       1.--.
                     Révillon, Moret, Richebourg.] (Prof. Dr. J.
                     Sarrazin.) 3. Aufl.
                  Dasselbe. Mit französischen Anmerkungen          1.--.
   C         11.  Coolidge, What Katy did at School. Stufe IV.     1.--.
                     (Dir. A. Seedorf.)
   C         38.  Coolidge, What Katy did. Stufe IV. (E.           0.90.
                     Merhaut.)
   A        *67.  Coppée, Ausgew. Erzählungen. (Prof. Dr. A.       1.--.
                     Gundlach.) 3. Aufl.
   C         20.  Corbet-Seymour, Only a Shilling. Stufe II. (Dr.  0.70.
                     Cl. Klöpper.)
   B          2.  Corneille, Le Cid. (Prof. Dr. W. Mangold.) 3.    1.30.
                     Aufl.
                  Dasselbe. Mit französischen Anmerkungen          1.30.
   B         17.  Corneille, Cinna. (Professor Dr. P. Schmid.)     1.--.
   B         21.  Corneille, Horace. (Professor Dr. P. Schmid.)    1.10.
   A        113.  Cornish, Life of Oliver Cromwell. [1 Karte.]     1.50.
                     (Prof. Dr. Deutschbein.)
   C         26.  Dalgleish, Life of Queen Victoria. Stufe IV.     1.30.
                     (Dr. Cl. Klöpper.)
   A        *27.  Daudet, Ausgew. Erzählungen. (Dir. Prof. Dr. E.  1.10.
                     Gropp.) 7. Aufl.
   A        *56.  Daudet, Tartarin de Tarascon. (Dr. J. Aymeric.)  1.20.
                     6. Aufl.
                  Dasselbe. Mit französischen Anmerkungen          1.20.
   A        *94.  Daudet, Le Petit Chose. (Dr. J. Aymeric.) 3.     1.30.
                     Aufl.
   A        135.  Daudet, Lettres de mon moulin. (Oberl. Dr.       1.30.
                     Hertel.)
   A       *111.  Day, The History of Little Jack.--The History    1.20.
                     of Sandford and Merton. (Direktor Dr. Hugo
                     Gruber.)
   A        *75.  Defoe, Robinson Crusoe. (Oberlehrer Dr. K.       1.--.
                     Foth.)
   B          8.  Delavigne, Louis XI. (Direktor Ph. Plattner.)    1.80.
   A       *117.  Deschaumes, Journal d'un Lycéen de 14 ans. (Dr.  1.80.
                     R. Kron.) Mit 3 Skizzen, 1 Plan und 1
                     Karte.
   A       *123.  Desèze, Défense de Louis XVI. (Oberl. Dr. O.     1.10.
                     Klein.)
   A        *45.  Dhombres et Monod, Biographies historiques.      1.--.
                     (Oberlehrer H. Bretschneider.) 7. Aufl.
   A         88.  Dickens, Sketches. (Dir. Prof. Dr. E. Penner.)   1.--.
                     Mit 1 Plan.
   A         93.  Dickens, The Cricket on the Hearth. (Oberl. B.   1.20.
                     Röttgers.)
   A        *95.  Dickens, David Copperfield's Schooldays. (Prof.  1.20.
                     Dr. H. Bahrs.) 3. Aufl.
   A         98.  Dickens, A Christmas Carol. (Oberl. B.           1.10.
                     Röttgers.)
   A       *134.  Dickmann u. Heuschen, Französisches Lesebuch.    1.80.
   A          2.  Duruy, Histoire de France de 1560/1643. (Dir.    1.40.
                     Prof. Dr. A. G. Meyer.) 4. Aufl. Mit 3
                     Kartenskizzen u. 1 Spezialkarte.
   A        *63.  Duruy, Biographies d'hommes célèbres des temps   1.20.
                     anciens et modernes. (Oberlehrer Karl
                     Penner.) Mit 2 Abbildungen. 3. Aufl.
   A       *106.  Duruy, Règne de Louis XIV de 1661--1715. 2.      1.80.
                     Aufl. (Professor Dr. H. Müller.) Mit 1
                     Karte.
   A       *116.  Duruy, Règne de Louis XVI et la Révolution       2.--.
                     française. (Prof. Dr. H. Müller.) Mit 1
                     Karte und 1 Plan.
   C         36.  Edgeworth, Lacy Lawrence. (Oberl. Dr. Fr.        1.10.
                     Lotsch).
   T.A.      *9.  Edgeworth, Miss, Popular Tales.                  0.50.
   C         41.  Eliot, Tom and Maggie. Stufe IV. (E. Merhaut.)
   A       *112.  English History. (Prof. Dr. Wershoven.) [4       1.40.
                     Karten, 3 Pläne.] 2. Aufl.
   A        119.  English Letters. (Prof. Dr. Ernst Regel.)        1.10.
   A       *133.  English School Life. (Prof. Dr. F. J.            1.30.
                     Wershoven.)
                  Dasselbe. Mit englischen Anmerkungen             1.30.
   A        *43.  Erckmann-Chatrian, Histoire d'un Conscrit de     1.40.
                     1813. [Im Auszuge]. (Dir. Prof. Dr. G.
                     Strien.) 6. Aufl. Mit 1 Karte.
   A        *51.  Erckmann-Chatrian, Waterloo. [Im Auszuge]. (Dr.  1.40.
                     Jos. Aymeric.) 4. Aufl. Mit 1 Karte.
   T.A.      *5.  Erzählungen, Ausgewählte (Courier, Toepffer,     0.60.
                     Dumas, Mérimée, Souvestre).
   C          3.  Erzählungen, Ausgew. (Mlle Cornaz, Mme Colomb,   0.80.
                     Paul de Musset) 1903.
   C         19.  Erzählungen, Ausgew. Aus: Voyage en France par   0.70.
                     deux soeurs par C. Juranville et P. Berger.
                     Stufe I. (Dr. Cl. Klöpper.).
   C         34.  Erzählungen aus dem französischen Schulleben.    1.20.
                     Stufe III u. IV. (Prof. Dr. F. J.
                     Wershoven.)
   A        102.  Erzählungen, Franz. [Souvestre,                  1.--.
                     Erckm.-Chatrian, Reybaud]. (Prof. Wolpert.)
   C         31.  Ev.-Green, The Secret of the Old House. Stufe    1.20.
                     III. (E. Taubenspeck.)
   T.A.     *15.  Fénelon, Aventures de Télémaque.                 0.70.
   A        103.  Figuier, Scènes et Tableaux de la Nature. (Dir.  1.30.
                     Prof. L. E. Rolfs.)
   C         28.  Fleuriot, Plus tard ou le jeune chef de          1.10.
                     famille. Stufe III. (Dr. Meyer.)
   T.A.      *4.  Florian, Guillaume Tell.                         0.50.
   A         89.  Forbes, My Experiences of the War between        1.30.
                     France and Germany. (Dr. Wilh. Heymann.)
   C         30.  Françaises illustres. Stufe III u. IV. (Prof.    1.20.
                     Dr. F. J. Wershoven.)
   A        *83.  La France, Anthologie géographique. (Dir. Prof.  2.20.
                     J. Leitritz.) 2. Aufl. Mit 24 Abbildungen
                     u. 1 Karte von Frankreich.
   A         52.  Franklin, The Life of Franklin. (Dir. F.         1.30.
                     Wüllenweber.) 2. Aufl. Mit 1 Karte.
   A         46.  Frédéric le Gr., Correspond. avec Voltaire.      1.30.
                     (Prof. Dr. Hoffmann.)
   A        *32.  Gardiner, Historical Biographies. (Prof. G.      1.10.
                     Wolpert.) 5. Aufl.
   B         11.  Gedichte. Auswahl englischer Gedichte. (Dir.     2.20.
                     Prof. Dr. E. Gropp und Dir. Prof. Dr. E.
                     Hausknecht.) 10. Aufl. 20 Bogen 8o.
                  Dazu »Kommentar« von E. Gropp u. E. Hausknecht.  3.20.
                     2 Teile. Geb.
   B          1.  Gedichte. Auswahl französ. Gedichte (Dir. Prof.  2.--.
                     Dr. E. Gropp und Dir. Prof. Dr. E.
                     Hausknecht.) 17 Bgn. 8o. 65.-72. Tausend.
                  Dazu »Kommentar« v. E. Gropp u. E. Hausknecht.   2.20.
                     3. Aufl. Geb.
   A        124.  Géographie de la France. (Dir. Prof. Dr. Ew.     1.10.
                     Goerlich.) Ausgabe mit nur französischen
                     Anmerkungen.
   A        129.  Geography of the British Empire. (Dir. Prof.     1.10.
                     Dr. Ew. Goerlich.) Ausgabe mit nur
                     englischen Anmerkungen.
   A         17.  Gibbon, History of the 1. and 4. Crusades.       1.40.
                     (Dir. Dr. F. Hummel.) Mit 2 Plänen.
   C         16.  Girardin, Récits de la vie réelle. Stufe IV.     0.80.
                     (Rektor K. Zwerg.)
   B         30.  Gobineau, Alexandre. (Prof. Dr. Völcker.)        1.10.
   T.A.      *7.  Goldsmith, The Vicar of Wakefield.               0.70.
   A        *96.  Grimm Frères, Contes choisis. [Ausw.] (Dir.      1.--.
                     Prof. L. E. Rolfs.)
   A       *108.  Grimm's and Hauff's Fairy Tales. (Dir. Prof.     1.10.
                     Dr. E. Penner.)
   A       *140.  Gros, Récits d'Aventures et Expéditions au Pôle  1.10.
                     Nord. (Oberlehrer Dr. L. Hasberg.) Mit 1
                     Karte.
   A         28.  Guizot, Histoire de la Révolution d'Angleterre   1.50.
                     de 1641-1649. (Prof. Dr. A. Althaus.) Mit 1
                     Karte.
   A         29.  Guizot, Histoire de la Civilisation. [Auswahl.]  1.40.
                     (Prof. Dr. A. Kressner.) 3. Aufl.
   A         50.  Guizot, Washington. (Dr. Cl. Klöpper.) Mit 1     1.20.
                     Karte.
   A        *84.  Halévy, L'Invasion. (Prof. Dr. J. Sarrazin.) M.  1.60.
                     3 Plänen. 3. Aufl.
   C         21.  Hanson, Stories of King Arthur. Stufe III. (Dr.  1.--.
                     Cl. Klöpper.)
   A       *126.  Henty, When London Burned. (Professor G.         1.50.
                     Wolpert.)
   A       *143.  Henty, Yarns on the beach, a bundle of tales.    1.10.
                     [Do your duty -- Surly Joe -- A Fish-Wife's
                     Dream]. (Oberl. Dr. Eule.)
   A         81.  d'Hérisson, Journal d'un Officier d'ordonnance.  1.50.
                     (Dr. U. Cosack.) Mit 2 Plänen. 3. Aufl.
   A        139.  d'Hérisson, Journal d'un Interprète en Chine.    1.30.
                     (Prof. Dr. A. Krause.)
   C         29.  Hope, Asc. R., Stories of Engl. Girlhood.        1.10.
                     (Prof. Dr. J. Klapperich.)
   A         *6.  Hume, The Reign of Queen Elizabeth. (Dir. Prof.  1.30.
                     Dr. A. Fritzsche.) 2. Aufl. Mit 1 Karte.
   A         15.  Hume, History of Charles I. and of the           1.40.
                     Commonwealth. (Prof. Dr. F. J. Wershoven.)
                     Mit 1 Karte.
   A         22.  Hume, The Foundation of English Liberty. (Prof.  1.50.
                     Bohne.) [2 Karten.]
   A          4.  Irving, Christmas. (Oberl. Dr. G. Tanger.)       0.90.
   A        *38.  Irving, Tales of the Alhambra. (Hofr. Dir. Dr.   1.10.
                     Wernekke.) 3. Aufl.
   A        138.  Irving, Bracebridge Hall or the Humorists.       1.20.
                     (Prof. Dr. Wolpert).
   C          8.  King Lear. -- Grace Darling by Eva Hope. --      0.80.
                     Some eminent Women of our times by Fawcett.
                     -- Florence Nightingale. -- Elizabeth Fry.
                     Stufe IV. (B. Mühry.)
   A         18.  Lamartine, Captivité, Procès et Mort de Louis    1.30.
                     XVI etc. (Prof. Dr. B. Lengnick.) 3. Aufl.
                     Mit 1 Abbildung u. 2 Plänen.
   T.A.      *2.  Lamartine, Nelson.                               0.50.
   T.A.      *3.  Lamartine, Christophe Colomb.                    0.60.
   T.A.     *12.  Lamartine, Gutenberg et Jacquard.                0.60.
   A        *42.  Lamé-Fleury, Histoire de la Découverte de        1.20.
                     l'Amérique. (Prof. Dr. M. Schmidt.) 7.
                     Aufl.
   A        *73.  Lamé-Fleury, Histoire de France de 406-1328.     1.--.
                     (Oberlehrer Dr. J. Hengesbach.) 3. Aufl.
   A       *107.  Lamé-Fleury, Histoire de France de 1328-1862.    1.40.
                     (Oberlehrer Dr. J. Hengesbach.) Mit 1
                     Karte. 3. Aufl.
   A        *12.  Lanfrey, Campagne de 1806-1807. (Professor Dr.   1.50.
                     Otto Klein.) 8. Aufl. Mit 2 Karten und 4
                     Plänen.
   A        *30.  Lanfrey, Campagne de 1809. (Prof. Dr. Otto       1.50.
                     Klein.) 3. Aufl. Mit 3 Plänen.
   A        *30.  Lanfrey, Campagne de 1809. (Prof. Dr. Otto       1.50.
                     Klein.) 3. Aufl. Mit 3 Plänen.
   A       *114.  Lectures historiques. (Prof. Dr. F. J.           1.30.
                     Wershoven.) 2. Aufl.
   C          1.  Le Petit Paresseux. 1er Voyage du Petit Louis    0.70.
                     d'après Mme de Witt née Guizot. Histoire
                     d'une Petite Fille Heureuse par Mme
                     Bersier. Stufe I. (M. Mühry.)
   C          5.  Little Susy's Little Servants by Prentiss. --    0.80.
                     Story told etc. by Bakewell. -- The True
                     History etc. by Brunefille. -- Topo by
                     Brunefille Stufe I. (B. Mühry.)
   A         91.  Littré, Comment j'ai fait mon dictionnaire.      0.80.
                     Causerie. (Prof. Dr. Imelmann.)
   C         35.  Livre de Lecture pour les enfants de 10-12 ans.  0.70.
                     Stufe!I. (Oberlehrer Dr. Fr. Lotsch.)
   A       *100.  London and its Environs. (Direktor Professor J.  2.50.
                     Leitritz.) Mit 23 Abbildungen und 2 Plänen.
   A          7.  Macaulay, State of England in 1685. (Professor   1.40.
                     Dr. A. Kressner.) 2. Aufl. Mit 1 Plan.
   A         16.  Macaulay, Lord Clive. (Prof. Dr. A. Kressner.)   1.20.
                     3. Aufl. [Karte.]
   A         21.  Macaulay, Warren Hastings. (Prof. Dr.            1.40.
                     Kressner.) 2. Aufl. [Karte.]
   A         24.  Macaulay, The Duke of Monmouth.                  1.30.
                     (Kreisschulinsp. Dr. O. Werner.) 2. Aufl.
                     Mit 1 Karte.
   A        137.  Macaulay, James II. Descent on Ireland. (Prof.   1.30.
                     Dr. Otto Hallbauer.)
   C         23.  Macé, La France avant les Francs. Stufe IV.      0.80.
                     (Rektor K. Zwerg.)
   C         15.  de Maistre, La jeune Sibérienne. Stufe IV.       1.--.
                     (Prof. Dr. J. Sarrazin.)
   C         10.  Malot, H., Romain Kalbris. Stufe IV. (M.         1.10.
                     Mühry.) Mit 1 Karte.
   A        144.  Marbot, Retraite de la grande Armée et Bataille  1.10.
                     de Leipzig. (Prof. Dr. Stange.)
   A        *37.  Marryat, The Children of the New Forest. (Prof.  1.40.
                     G. Wolpert.) 3. Aufl.
   A         61.  Marryat, Masterman Ready or the Wreck of the     1.30.
                     Pacific. (Prof. Adolf Mager.)
   A         99.  Marryat, The Three Cutters. (Dr. R. Miller.) 3.  0.80.
                     Aufl. Mit 1 Karte.
   A       *127.  Marryat, The Settlers in Canada. (Kgl.           1.20.
                     Regierungs- u. Schulrat Jos. Heuschen.)
   C         22.  Maxime du Camp, Deux petites nouvelles. Aus:     0.80.
                     Bons Coeurs et Braves Gens u. Mme Léonie
                     D'Aunet, Le Spitzberg. Aus: Voyage d'une
                     femme au Spitzberg. Stufe IV. (Dr. Cl.
                     Klöpper.)
   A         65.  Mérimée, Colomba. (Dir. Prof. J. Leitritz.) 2.   1.30.
                     Aufl.
   A         *1.  Michaud, Siège d'Antioche et Prise de            1.20.
                     Jérusalem. (Dir. Dr. F. Hummel.) 4. Aufl.
                     Mit 3 Karten und 4 Abbild.
   A        *10.  Michaud, Moeurs et Coutumes des Croisades.       1.20.
                     (Dir. Dr. F. Hummel.) 3. Aufl.
   A        *13.  Michaud, Influence et Résultats des Croisades.   1.10.
                     (Dir. Dr. F. Hummel.) 2. Aufl.
   A       *130.  Michaud, Histoire de la 3me Croisade. (Prof.     1.30.
                     Dr. O. Klein.)
   T.A.      *1.  Michaud, La Troisième Croisade.                  0.60.
   A        *35.  Mignet, Histoire de la Terreur. [Aus: Histoire   1.50.
                     de la Révolution française]. (Prof. A. Ey.)
                     3. Aufl. Mit 1 Plan.
   A         44.  Mignet, Essai sur la formation territoriale et   1.30.
                     politique de la France. (Oberlehrer Dr. A.
                     Korell.) Mit 1 Karte.
   A         64.  Mignet, Vie de Franklin. (Prof. H. Voss.) Mit 1  1.--.
                     Karte.
   A       *118.  Mirabeau, Discours choisis. (Prof. Dr. O.        1.--.
                     Klein.) Mit Bild Mirabeaus.
   B          4.  Molière, Le Misanthrope. (Prof. Dr. W.           1.20.
                     Mangold.) 2. Aufl.
   B         19.  Molière, L'Avare. (Prof. Dr. W. Mangold.) 3.     1.20.
                     Aufl.
   B         20.  Molière, Le Bourgeois gentilhomme. (Prof. Dr.    1.20.
                     W. Mangold.) 2. Aufl.
   B         24.  Molière, Les Femmes savantes. (Prof. Dr. W.      1.20.
                     Mangold.) 2. Aufl.
   B         28.  Molière, Les Précieuses ridicules. (Prof. Dr.    0.90.
                     W. Mangold.)
   A        121.  Molière et le Théâtre en France. (Prof. Dr. F.   1.10.
                     J. Wershoven.)
   A        *92.  Monod, Allemands et Français. (Direktor Dr. W.   0.90.
                     Kirschten.) 3. Aufl. Mit 3 Kartenskizzen
                     und 1 Karte.
                  Dasselbe. Mit französischen Anmerkungen          0.90.
   A          3.  Montesquieu, Considérations sur les causes de    1.30.
                     la grandeur des Romains, etc. (Prof. Dr. B.
                     Lengnick.)
   A        105.  Nouvelles choisies [Cladel, Foley, Normand].     1.10.
                     (Prof. Dr. A. Kressner.)
   C         33.  Oliphant Mrs., Agnes Hopetoun's School and       1.--.
                     Holidays. -- The Experiences of a Little
                     Girl. (E. Taubenspeck.)
   A        *82.  Paris et ses environs. (Dir. Prof. J.            2.--.
                     Leitritz.) 3. Aufl. Mit 27 Abbildungen, 1
                     Karte und 1 Stadtplan.
                  Dieser Band ist von IIb bis Ia gleich
                     nutzbringend zu verwenden.
   T.A.      *8.  Parley, The Book of Wonders.                     0.60.
   A         85.  Passy, Le Petit Poucet du XIXe siècle G.         1.20.
                     Stephenson et la Naissance des Chemins de
                     Fer. (Oberl. B. Röttgers.) Mit 10 Abbild.
   A       *101.  Perrault, Contes de Fées. (Oberl. Dr. A.         1.--.
                     Mohrbutter.)
   B          7.  Piron, La Métromanie. (Professor Dr. A.          1.50.
                     Kressner.)
   C          6.  Poor Nelly. By the author of "Mr. Burke's        0.80.
                     Nieces" etc. Stufe II. (B. Mühry.) 7.-9.
                     Tausend.
   A       *136.  Porchat, Le berger et le proscrit. (Kgl.         1.--.
                     Regierungs- und Schulrat J. Heuschen.)
   C         37.  Probable sons. Stufe III. (Elisabeth Dickmann.)  1.10.
   T.A.     *16.  Prosa, Ausgew., des 17. und 18. Jahrhunderts     0.90.
                     (Mme de Sévigné, Le Sage, Montesquieu,
                     Voltaire).
   T.A.     *17.  Prosa, Ausgew., des 18. und 19. Jahrhunderts.    0.80.
                     I. Teil.
   T.A.     *18.  Prosa, Ausgew., des 18. und 19. Jahrhunderts.    0.70.
                     II. Teil.
   T.A.     *19.  Prosa, Ausgew., des 18. und 19. Jahrhunderts.    0.80.
                     III. Teil.
   T.A.     *20.  Prosa, Ausgew., des 18. und 19. Jahrhunderts.    0.80.
                     IV. Teil.
   B          3.  Racine, Britannicus. (Prof. Dr. B. Lengnick.)    1.--.
                     2. Aufl.
   B          6.  Racine, Athalie. (Direktor Dr. F. Hummel.) 2.    1.20.
                     Aufl.
   B         14.  Racine, Phèdre. (Professor Dr. A. Kressner.) 2.  1.10.
                     Aufl.
   A        120.  Recent Travel and Adventure. Livingstone,        1.--.
                     Stanley, Emin Pasha, Gordon, Greely,
                     Nordenskjöld. (Prof. Dr. J. Klapperich.) 2
                     Karten.
   A          8.  Reden, Ausgewählte, englischer Staatsmänner. I.  0.80.
                     [Pitt d. Ä. u. d. J.] (Prof. Dr. J. C. A.
                     Winkelmann.)
   A         23.  Reden, Ausgewählte, englischer Staatsmänner.     1.10.
                     II. [Burke: Ostind. Bill des Ch. J. Fox.]
                     (Prof. Dr. J. C. A. Winkelmann.)
   A         11.  Reden, Ausgewählte, französischer Kanzelredner   1.20.
                     [Bossuet, Fléchier, Massillon]. (Professor
                     Dr. A. Kressner.)
   B         18.  Regnard, Le Joueur. (Oberlehrer Dr. Otto         1.30.
                     Boerner.)
   A         55.  Robertson, Charles V. and Francis I. from        1.20.
                     1521-1527. (Professor Dr. H. Bahrs.)
   A         86.  Saintine, Picciola. (Prof. Dr. B. Lengnick.)     1.20.
   B         23.  Sandeau, Mlle de la Seiglière. (Prof. Dr. J.     1.60.
                     Sarrazin.) 4. Aufl.
   A        *59.  Sarcey, Le Siège de Paris. (Dr. U. Cosack.) Mit  1.50.
                     Karte. 6. Aufl.
   A          9.  Scott, History of France from 1328-1380. (Prof.  1.50.
                     Dr. H. Fehse.) Mit 1 Karte und 2 Plänen.
   A        *33.  Scott, Sir William Wallace and Robert The        1.10.
                     Bruce. [Aus: Tales of a Grandfather].
                     (Professor Dr. H. Fehse.) 2. Aufl.
   A         54.  Scott, Ivanhoe. [Auszug], (Dir. Prof. Dr. E.     1.40.
                     Penner.) 3. Aufl.
   A         62.  Scott, Scenes from Old-Scottish Life. [Aus: The  1.10.
                     Fair Maid of Perth]. (Professor Dr. H.
                     Bahrs.) Mit 1 Karte.
   A        *71.  Scott, Mary Stuart. (Direktor Prof. Dr. A.       1.20.
                     Fritzsche.)
   A        *87.  Scott, Kenilworth. [Auszug.] (Oberl. Dr.         1.20.
                     Mohrbutter.)
   A       *104.  Scott, Quentin Durward. (Dr. Felix Pabst.)       1.50.
   B         25.  Scott, The Lady of the Lake. (Prof. Dr.          1.20.
                     Werner.) Mit 1 Karte.
   B         27.  Scribe, Le Verre d'eau. (Dir. Prof. L. E.        1.10.
                     Rolfs.)
   T.A.     *14.  Scribe et Delavigne. Le Diplomate etc.           0.60.
   A         41.  Ségur, Napoléon á Moscou und Passage de la       1.50.
                     Bérézina. (Dir. Prof. Dr. A. Hemme.) 5.
                     Aufl. Mit 4 Plänen.
   C          7.  Sewell, Anna, Black Beauty. Stufe III. (B.       0.85.
                     Mühry.)
                  Seymour, siehe Chaucer.
   B          9.  Shakespeare, Macbeth. (Dir. Prof. Dr. E.         1.40.
                     Penner.) 2. Aufl.
   B         15.  Shakespeare, Julius Cæsar. (Dir. Prof. Dr. E.    1.30.
                     Penner.) 2. Aufl.
   B         16.  Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice. (Direktor   1.20.
                     Dr. Otto E. A. Dickmann.) 2. Aufl.
   B         29.  Shakespeare, Coriolanus. (Dir. Prof. Dr. E.      1.50.
                     Penner.) Ausgabe mit nur englischen
                     Anmerkungen.
   A        125.  Shakespeare and the England of Shakespeare.      1.10.
                     (Prof. Dr. Wershoven.)
   A          5.  Southey, The Life of Nelson. (Prof. Dr. W.       1.50.
                     Parow.) Mit 4 Skizzen, 1 Kärtchen und 1
                     Schiffsbild. 2. Aufl.
   A         26.  Souvestre, Confessions d'un Ouvrier. (Prof. O.   1.10.
                     Josupeit.) 2. Aufl.
   A       *128.  Souvestre, Au Coin du Feu. (Oberlehrer Dr. A.    1.10.
                     Mohrbutter.)
   T.A.     *13.  Souvestre, Un Philosophe sous les Toits.         0.70.
   C         24.  Sprachstoff für den Anschauungs- u.              0.80.
                     Sprachunterricht von F. Strübing. I.B.
                     [Bauernhof, Wald, Ernte, Herbst.] Stufe IV.
                     (M. Altgelt.)
   C         27.  Sprachstoff f. d. Anschauungs- u.                1.20.
                     Sprachunterricht v. F. Strübing. II.B.
                     [Winter, Hafen, Mühle, Gebirgsgegend.]
                     Stufe IV. (M. Altgelt.)
   C         13.  Spyri, Reseli aux Roses. Bastien et Franceline.  0.80.
                     Stufe II. (Dr. Cl. Klöpper.)
   C         18.  Stahl, Maroussia. Stufe IV. (M. Mühry.)          0.80.
   A         25.  Swift, Gulliver's Travels. I. (Dir. Dr. F.       0.80.
                     Hummel.)
   A         31.  Swift, Gulliver's Travels. II. (Dir. Dr. F.      0.80.
                     Hummel.)
   A        *57.  Taine, Les Origines de la France contemporaine.  1.20.
                     (Prof. Dr. Otto Hoffmann.) 6. Aufl.
   A        *76.  Tales and Stories from Modern Writers. I.        1.20.
                     Bändchen. (Prof. Dr. J. Klapperich.) 2.
                     Aufl.
   A         78.  Theuriet, La Princesse Verte. (Dir. Prof. L. E.  1.--.
                     Rolfs.)
   A        *79.  Theuriet, Ausgew. Erzählungen. (Prof. Dr. A.     1.10.
                     Gundlach.) 2. Aufl.
   A         80.  Theuriet, Les Enchantements de la Forêt.         0.90.
                     [Auswahl.] (Dir. Prof. Ludwig E. Rolfs.)
   A         19.  Thierry, Histoire d'Attila. (Prof. Dr.           1.30.
                     Wershoven.) [1 Karte.] 2. Aufl.
   A         63.  Thierry, Guillaume le Conquérant. (Dir. Prof.    1.40.
                     J. Leitritz.) Mit 1 Karte und 1
                     Schlachtenplan.
   A        *14.  Thiers, Expédition de Bonaparte en Égypte.       1.50.
                     (Prof Dr. Otto Klein.) 6. Aufl. Mit 3
                     Karten.
   A         39.  Thiers, Campagne d'Italie en 1800. (Prof. Dr.    1.50.
                     A. Althaus.) 2. Aufl. Mit 1 Karte und 2
                     Plänen.
   C         12.  Traill, Mrs., In the Forest or Pictures of Life  0.80.
                     and Scenery in the Woods of Canada. Stufe
                     II. (Dr. Cl. Klöpper.)
   A        *68.  Verne, Christophe Colomb. (Dr. O. Mielck.)       1.--.
   A         70.  De Vigny, Cinq-Mars ou une Conjuration sous      1.20.
                     Louis XIII. (Direktor Prof. Dr. G. Strien.)
                     2. Aufl.
   A        *74.  De Vigny, La Canne de Jonc et Le Cachet Rouge.   0.90.
                     (Prof. Dr. Kasten.)
   A         58.  Villemain, Hist. du Protect. de Cromwell.        1.10.
                     (Prof. Dr. A. Gundlach.)
   A         34.  Voltaire, Guerre de la Succession d'Espagne.     1.40.
                     [Aus: Siècle de Louis XIV]. (Geh.
                     Regierungsrat Prof. Dr. R. Foss.)
   A        *40.  Voltaire, Histoire de Charles XII. (Dir. Prof.   1.40.
                     Dr. K. Mühlefeld.) 2. Aufl. Mit 1 Karte und
                     2 Plänen.
   B          5.  Voltaire, Mérope. (Dr. R. Mahrenholtz.)          1.--.
   B         12.  Voltaire, Zaïre. (Dr. R. Mahrenholtz.)           1.--.
   B         13.  Voltaire, Tancrède. (Dr. R. Mahrenholtz.)        1.--.
   T.A.      *6.  Voltaire, Pierre le Grand.                       0.60.
   A         66.  Yonge, The Book of Golden Deeds. (Prof. G.       1.--.
                     Wolpert.)
   T.A.     *11.  Yonge, The Book of Golden Deeds.                 0.60.




Anmerkungen zur Transkription


Die Kapitelüberschriften, die der Buchvorlage als Seitenüberschriften
beigegeben waren, wurden an die Kapitelanfänge verschoben.
Verlagsanzeigen wurden am Ende des Buches vereinigt.

Hervorhebungen, die im Original g e s p e r r t oder kursiv sind, wurden
mit Unterstrichen wie _hier_ gekennzeichnet. Fette Schrift wurde ¶so¶
markiert.

Offensichtliche Druckfehler wurden berichtigt wie hier aufgeführt
(vorher/nachher):

   ... FRANCES HODGSONS BURNETT ...
   ... FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT ...

   [S. VI]:
   ... erscheinende Kürzungen, wie: I'd, he'd, I'll, h'ell u. a., ...
   ... erscheinende Kürzungen, wie: I'd, he'd, I'll, he'll u. a., ...

   [S. 49]:
   ... is'nt, you know; and you'd think 'dear' was spelled ...
   ... isn't, you know; and you'd think 'dear' was spelled ...

   [S. 80]:
   ... "Why, boss!" he exlaimed, "d'ye know him yerself?" ...
   ... "Why, boss!" he exclaimed, "d'ye know him yerself?" ...

   [S. 102]:
   ... 1776 erfolgte die Unabhängigkeitserklärung (Declaration of
       Independance ...
   ... 1776 erfolgte die Unabhängigkeitserklärung (Declaration of
       Independence ...

   [S. 102]:
   ... Massachusetts, New-Hampshire, Conne(c)ticut, Rode Island, New ...
   ... Massachusetts, New-Hampshire, Conne(c)ticut, Rhode Island,
       New ...

   [S. 102]:
   ... York, New Jersey, Pensylvania, Delaware, Maryland, South ...
   ... York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, South ...

   ... den Schülern im Stiche lassen; sie fehlen bei den ...
   ... den Schüler im Stiche lassen; sie fehlen bei den ...






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Lord Fauntleroy (abridged), by 
Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY (ABRIDGED) ***

***** This file should be named 49579-8.txt or 49579-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/5/7/49579/

Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Juliet Sutherland, Jens
Sadowski, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
