Project Gutenberg's Mere Girauds Little Daughter, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mere Girauds Little Daughter

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Release Date: November 4, 2007 [EBook #23326]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MERE GIRAUDS LITTLE DAUGHTER ***




Produced by David Widger






MERE GIRAUDS LITTLE DAUGHTER

By Frances Hodgson Burnett

Copyright, 1877


"Prut!" said Annot, her sabots clattering loudly on the brick floor as
she moved more rapidly in her wrath. "Prut! Madame Giraud, indeed! There
was a time, and it was but two years ago, that she was but plain
Mere Giraud, and no better than the rest of us; and it seems to me,
neighbors, that it is not well to show pride because one has the luck to
be favored by fortune. Where, forsooth, would our 'Madame' Giraud
stand if luck had not given her a daughter pretty enough to win a rich
husband?"

"True, indeed!" echoed two of the gossips who were her admiring
listeners. "True, beyond doubt. Where, indeed?"

But the third, a comely, fresh-skinned matron, who leaned against the
door, and knitted a stout gray stocking with fast-clashing needles, did
not acquiesce so readily.

"Well, well, neighbors," she said, "for my part, I do not see so much to
complain of. Mere Giraud--she is still Mere Giraud to me--is as honest
and kindly a soul as ever. It is not she who has called herself Madame
Giraud; it is others who are foolish enough to fancy that good luck must
change one's old ways. If she had had the wish to be a grand personage,
would she not have left our village before this and have joined Madame
Legrand in Paris. On the contrary, however, she remains in her cottage,
and is as good a neighbor as ever, even though she is fond of talking of
the carriages and jewels of Madame Legrand and her establishment on the
Boulevard Malesherbes. In fact, I ask you, who of us would not rejoice
also to be the mother of a daughter whose fortune had been so good?"

"That also is true," commented the amiable couple, nodding their
white-capped heads with a sagacious air. "True, without doubt."

But Annot replied with a contemptuous shrug of her shoulders:--

"Wait until Madame Giraud is invited to visit the Boulevard
Malesherbes," she said. "We have not heard that this has happened yet."

"She would' not go if she were, at least not to remain. Her heart has
grown to the old place she bore her children in, and she has herself
said to me most sensibly: 'Laure is young, and will learn easily the
ways of the great world; I am old, and cannot; I am better at home among
my neighbors.' Doubtless, however, In course of time she will pay Madame
Legrand a visit at her home in Paris, or at the chateau which Monsieur
Legrand of course possesses, as the rich and aristocratic always do."

"Doubtless!" said Annot, grimly; "doubtless."

Honest Jeanne Tallot passed the sneer by, and went on with stout gravity
of demeanor:--

"There is only one thing for which I somewhat blamed Mere Giraud, and
that is that I think she has scarcely done her duty toward Valentin. He
disappointed her by being an ugly lad instead of a pretty girl, and she
had not patience with him. Laure was the favorite. Whatever Laure did
was right, and it was not so with the other, though I myself know that
Valentin was a good lad, and tender-hearted."

"Once," put in a white cap, "I saw her beat him severely because he fell
with the little girl in his arms and scratched her cheek, and it was
not his fault. His foot slipped upon a stone. He was carrying the child
carefully and tenderly enough. You are right in calling him a good lad,
neighbor Tallot. He was a good lad,--Valentin Giraud,--and fond of his
mother, notwithstanding that she was not fond of him."

"Yes," added her companion; "but it is a truth that he was a great
contrast to the girl. _Mon Dieu!_ his long limbs and awkward body, his
great sad eyes and ugly face! While Laure,--was she not tall and slender
and white, like a lily in a garden? And her voice was like the ringing
of silver, and her eyes so soft and large. As an infant, she reminded
one of the little Jesu as one sees him in the churches. No wonder that
Mere Giraud fretted at the difference between the two. And Valentin was
her first, and what mother does not look for great things in her first?
We cannot help feeling that something must come of one's own charms if
one has any, and Mere Giraud was a handsome bride. An ugly bantling
seems to offer one a sort of insult, particularly at first, when one is
young and vain."

"There was no more beautiful young girl than Laure Giraud at sixteen,"
said Jeanne Tallot.

"And none more useless," said Annot loudly. "Give me a young girl who
is industrious and honest. My Margot is better provided for than Laure
Giraud was before her marriage; but her hands are not white, nor is her
waist but a span around. She has too much work to do. She is not a tall,
white, swaying creature who is too good to churn and tend the creatures
who give her food. I have heard it said that Laure would have worked
if her mother had permitted it, but I don't believe it. She had not a
working look. Mademoiselle Laure was too good for the labor of humble
people; she must go to Paris and learn a fine, delicate trade."

"But good came of it," put in Jeanne Tallot, "It proved all the better
for her."

"Let her mother thank the Virgin, then," cried Annot, contemptuously.
"It might not have proved the better; 'it might have proved the worse;
evil might have come of it instead of good. Who among us has not heard
of such things? Did not Marie Gautier go to Paris too?"

"Ah, poor little one, indeed!" sighed the white caps.

"And in two years," added Annot, "_her_ mother died of a broken heart."

"But," said cheerful Jeanne, somewhat dryly, "Laure's mother is not dead
yet, so let us congratulate ourselves that to go to Paris has brought
luck to one of our number at least, and let us deal charitably with Mere
Giraud, who certainly means well, and is only naturally proud of her
daughter's grandeur. For my part, I can afford to rejoice with her."

She rolled up her stout stocking into a ball, and stuck her needles
through it, nodding at the three women.

"I promised I would drop in and spend a few minutes with her this
morning," she said; "so I will bid you good-day," and she stepped across
the threshold and trudged off in the sunshine, her wooden shoes sounding
bravely on the path.

It was only a little place,--St. Croix, as we shall call it for want of
a better name,--a little village of one street, and of many vines,
and roses, and orchards, and of much gossip. Simple people inhabited
it,--simple, ignorant folk, who knew one another, and discussed one
another's faults and grape-crops with equal frankness, worked hard,
lived frugally, confessed regularly, and slept well. Devout people, and
ignorant, who believed that the little shrines they erected in their
vineyards brought blessings upon their grapes, and who knew nothing of
the great world beyond, and spoke of Paris with awe, and even a shade
of doubt. Living the same lives generation after generation, tilling the
same crops, and praying before the same stone altar in the small, quaint
church, it is not to be wondered at that when a change occurred to any
one of their number, it was regarded as a sort of social era. There
were those in St. Croix who had known Mere Giraud's grandfather, a
slow-spoken, kindly old peasant, who had drunk his _vin ordinaire_, and
smoked his pipe with the poorest; and there was not one who did not
well know Mere Giraud herself, and who had not watched the growth of the
little Laure, who had bloomed into a beauty not unlike the beauty of the
white Provence roses which climbed over and around her mother's cottage
door. "Mere Giraud's little daughter," she had been called, even after
she grew into the wonderfully tall and wonderfully fair creature she
became before she left the village, accompanying her brother Valentin to
Paris.

"_Ma foi!_" said the men, "but she is truly a beauty, Mere Giraud's
little daughter!"

"She should be well looked to," said the wiseacres,--"Mere Giraud's
little daughter."

"There is one we must always give way before," said the best-natured
among the girls, "and that one is Mere Giraud's little daughter."

The old _Cure_ the parish took interest in her, and gave her lessons,
and, as Mere Giraud would have held her strictly to them, even if she
had not been tractable and studious by nature, she was better educated
and more gently trained than her companions. The fact was, however, that
she had not many companions. Some element in her grace and beauty
seemed to separate her from the rest of her class. Village sports and
festivities had little attraction for her, and, upon the whole, she
seemed out of place among them. Her stature, her fair, still face, and
her slow, quiet movements, suggested rather embarrassingly to the humble
feasters the presence of some young princess far above them.

"_Pouf!_" said a sharp-tongued belle one day, "I have no patience with
her. She is so tall, this Laure, that one must be forever looking up to
her, and I, for one, do not care to be forever looking up."

The hint of refined pride in her demeanor was Mere Giraud's greatest
glory.

"She is not like the rest, my Laure," she would say to her son. "One can
see it in the way in which she holds her head'. She has the quiet, grave
air of a great personage."

There were many who wondered that Valentin showed no jealousy or
distaste at hearing his sister's praises sounded so frequently to his
own detriment. There was no praise for him. The poor, fond mother's
heart was too full of Laure. Her son had been a bitter disappointment
to her, and, to her mind, was fitted for nothing but to make himself
an adoring slave to his sister's beauty; and this, the gentle,
generous fellow certainly was. He was always ready to serve her; always
affectionate, always faithful; and Mere Giraud, who was blind to, or
careless of, all his loving, constant labor for her own comfort, deigned
to see that he did his duty toward Laure.

"He has at least the sense to appreciate her as far as he is able," she
said.

So when Valentin, who had a talent for engraving, was discovered by some
one who understood his genius, and could make use of it, and was offered
a place in the great, gay city, Mere Giraud formed an ambitious plan. He
should take Laure and find her a position also; she had the fingers of a
fair magician, and could embroider marvelously. So she trusted Laure to
him, and the two bade farewell to St. Croix and departed together. A
month passed, and then there came a letter containing good news.
Valentin was doing well, and Laure also. She had found a place in a
great family where she was to embroider and wait upon a young lady. They
were rich people, and were kind, and paid her well, and she was happy.

"When they first saw her, they were astonished," wrote the simple,
tender Valentin. "I went with her to present herself. My employer had
recommended her. There is a son who is past his youth, and who has
evidently seen the world. He is aristocratic and fair, and slightly
bald, but extremely handsome still. He sat holding a newspaper in his
long, white fingers, and when we entered, he raised his eyes above it
and looked at Laure, and I heard him exclaim under his breath, '_Mon
Dieu!_ as if her beauty fairly startled him."

When the _Cure_, to whom the proud mother showed the letter, read this
part, he did not seem as rejoiced as Mere Giraud had expected. On the
contrary, he looked a little grave, and rubbed his forehead.

"Ah, ah!" he said; "there lies the danger."

"Danger!" exclaimed Mere Giraud, starting.

He turned, and regarded her with a rather hesitant air, as if he were
at once puzzled and fearful,--puzzled by her simplicity, and fearful of
grieving her unnecessarily.

"Valentin is a good lad," he said. "Valentin will be watchful,--though
perhaps he is too good to suspect evil."

Mere Giraud put her hand to her heart.

"You are not afraid?" she said, quite proudly, beginning at last to
comprehend. "You are not afraid of evil to Laure?"

"No, no, no," he answered; "surely not."

He said no more then, but he always asked to see the letters, and read
them with great care, sometimes over and over again. They came very
regularly for six or seven months, and then there was a gap of a few
weeks, and then came a strange, almost incomprehensible, letter from
Valentin, containing news which almost caused Mere Giraud's heart to
burst with joy and gratitude. Laure was married, and had made such a
marriage as could scarcely have been dreamed of. A rich aristocrat, who
had visited her employers, had fallen in love with her, and married her.
He had no family to restrain him, and her beauty had won him completely
from the first hour. He had carried her away with him to make a
prolonged tour. The family with whom she had lived had been lavish
in their gifts and kindness, but they had left Paris also and were
voyaging. The name of Laure's bridegroom was Legrand, and there came
messages from Laure, and inclosed was a handsome present of money.

Mere Giraud was overwhelmed with joy. Before three hours had passed, all
St Croix knew the marvelous news. She went from house to house showing
the letter and the money, and it was not until night that she cooled
down sufficiently to labor through a long epistle to Valentin.

It was a year before Laure returned to Paris, and during that time
she wrote but seldom; but Valentin wrote often, and answered all his
mother's questions, though not as fluently, nor with so many words as
she often wished. Laure was rich, and beautiful as ever; her husband
adored her, and showered gifts and luxuries upon her; she had equipages
and jewels; she wore velvet and satin and lace every day; she was a
great lady, and had a house like a palace. Laure herself did not say so
much. In her secret heart, Mere Giraud often longed for more, but she
was a discreet and farseeing woman.

"What would you?" she said. "She must drive out in her equipage, and she
must dress and receive great people, and I am not so blind a mother as
not to see that she will have many things to learn. She has not time to
write long letters,--and see how she cares for me,--money, see you, by
every letter, and a silk dress and lace cap she herself has chosen in
the Boulevard Capucines. And I must care for myself, and furnish the
cottage prettily, and keep a servant. Her wealth and great fortune have
not rendered her undutiful,--my Laure."

So she talked of Madame Legrand, and so all St. Croix talked of Madame
Legrand, and some, of course, were envious and prophesied that the end
had not come yet, and Mere Giraud would find herself forgotten some fine
day; and others rejoiced with her, and congratulated themselves that
they knew so aristocratic a person as Madame Legrand.

Jeanne Tallot was of those who sympathized with her in all
warm-heartedness and candor.

With her knitting in her hand ready for action, and with friendly
unceremoniousness, she presented herself at the cottage door one
morning, nodding and speaking before she had crossed the threshold.

"Good-day, neighbor Giraud. Any letters from Laure this morning?"

Mere Giraud, who sat before the window under the swinging cage of her
bird, looked up with an air a little more serious than usual.

"Ah!" she said, "I am glad it is you, Jeanne. I have been wishing to see
you."

Jeanne seated herself, smiling.

"Then," said she, "it is well I came."

But immediately she noticed the absent look of her friend, and commented
upon it.

"You do not look at your best this morning," she said. "How does it
occur?"

"I am thinking," said Mere Giraud with some importance of manner,--"I am
thinking of going to Paris."

"To Paris!"

"I am anxious," shaking her head seriously. "I had last night a bad
dream. I wish to see Laure."

Then she turned and looked at Jeanne almost wistfully.

"It is a long time since I have seen her," she said.

"Yes," answered Jeanne in a little doubt; "but Paris is a long way off."

"Yes," said Mere Giraud; "but it appears that all at once I realize how
long it is since I have seen my child. I am getting old, you see. I was
not very young when she was born, and, as one grows older, one becomes
more uneasy and obstinate in one's fancies. This morning I feel that
I must see my Laure. My heart yearns for her, and"--hastily--"she will
undoubtedly be rejoiced to see me. She has often said that she wished
she might lay her head upon my breast again."

It seemed that she was resolved upon the journey. She was in a singular,
uneasy mood, and restless beyond measure. She who had never been twenty
miles from St. Croix had made up her mind to leave it at once and
confront all the terrors of a journey to Paris,--for there were terrors
in such a journey to the mind of a simple peasant who had so far
traveled but in one groove. She would not even wait to consult _Monsieur
le Cure_, who was unfortunately absent. Jeanne discovered to her
astonishment that she had already made her small preparations, had
packed her best garments in a little wooden box, laying the silk gown
and lace cap at the top that they might be in readiness.

"I will not interfere at all, and I shall not remain long," she said.
"Only long enough to see my Laure, and spend a few days with her
quietly. It is not Paris I care for, or the great sights; it is that I
must see my child."

St. Croix was fairly bewildered at the news it heard the next day. Mere
Giraud had gone to Paris to visit Madame Legrand--had actually gone,
sending her little servant home, and shutting up her small, trim
cottage.

"Let us hope that Madame Legrand will receive her as she expects to be
received," said Annot. "For my part I should have preferred to remain
in St. Croix. Only yesterday Jeanne Tallot told us that she had no
intention of going."

"She will see wonderful things," said the more simple and amiable. "It
is possible that she may be invited to the Tuileries, and without doubt
she will drive to the Bois de Boulogne in Madame Legrand's carriage,
with servants in livery to attend her. My uncle's sister's son, who is a
_valet de place_ in a great family, tells us that the aristocracy
drive up and down the Champs Ellysees every afternoon, and the sight is
magnificent."

But Mere Giraud did not look forward to such splendors as these. "I
shall see my Laure as a great lady," she said to herself. "I shall hold
her white hands and kiss her cheeks."

The roar of vehicles, and the rush and crowd and bustle bewildered her;
the brightness and the rolling wheels dazzled her old eyes, but she held
herself bravely. People to whom she spoke smiled at her _patois_ and her
innocent questions, but she did not care.

She found a _fiacre_ which took her to her destination; and when, after
she had paid the driver, he left her, she entered the wide doors with
a beating heart, the blood rising on her cheek, and glowing through the
withered skin.

"Madame Legrand," she said a little proudly to the _concierge_, and the
woman stared at her as she led her up the staircase. She was so eager
that she scarcely saw the beauty around her,--the thick, soft carpets,
the carved balustrades, the superb lamps. But when they stopped before a
door she touched the _concierge_ upon the arm.

"Do not say my name," she said. "I am her mother."

The woman stared at her more than ever.

"It is not my place to announce you," she said. "I only came up because
I thought you would not find the way."

She could not have told why it was or how it happened, but when at last
she was ushered into the _salon_ a strange sense of oppression fell upon
her. The room was long and lofty, and so shadowed by the heavy curtains
falling across the windows that it was almost dark.

For a few seconds she saw nobody, and then all at once some one rose
from a reclining chair at the farther end of the apartment and advanced
a few steps toward her--a tall and stately figure, moving slowly.

"Who?"--she heard a cold, soft voice say, and then came a sharp cry, and
Laurel white hands were thrown out in a strange, desperate gesture, and
she stopped and stood like a statue of stone. "Mother--mother--mother!"
she repeated again and again, as if some indescribable pain shook her.

If she had been beautiful before, now she was more beautiful still. She
was even taller than ever,--she was like a queen. Her long robe was of
delicate gray velvet, and her hair and throat and wrists were bound with
pearls and gold. She was so lovely and so stately that for a moment Mere
Giraud was half awed, but the next it was as if her strong mother heart
broke loose.

"My Laure!" she cried out. "Yes, it is I, my child--it is I, Laure;" and
she almost fell upon her knees as she embraced her, trembling for very
ecstasy.

But Laure scarcely spoke. She was white and cold, and at last she gasped
forth three words.

"Where is Valentin?"

But Mere Giraud did not know. It was not Valentin she cared to see.
Valentin could wait, since she had, her Laure. She sat down beside her
in one of the velvet chairs, and she held the fair hand in her own. It
was covered with jewels, but she did not notice them; her affection only
told her that it was cold and tremulous.

"You are not well, Laure?" she said. "It was well that my dream warned
me to come. Something is wrong."

"I am quite well," said Laure. "I do not suffer at all."

She was so silent that if Mere Giraud had not had so much to say she
would have been troubled \ as it was, however, she was content to pour
forth her affectionate speeches one after another without waiting to be
answered.

"Where is Monsieur Legrand?" she ventured at last.

"He is," said Laure, in a hesitant voice,--"he is in Normandy."

"Shall I not see him?" asked Mere Giraud.

"I am afraid not, unless your visit is a long one. He will be absent for
some months."

She did not speak with any warmth. It was as if she did not care to
speak of him at all,--as if the mention of him even embarrassed her a
little.

Mere Giraud felt a secret misgiving.

"I shall not stay long," she said; "but I could not remain away. I
wished so eagerly to see you, and know that you were happy. You are
happy, my Laure?"

Laure turned toward her and gave her a long look--a look which seemed
unconsciously to ask her a question.

"Happy!" she answered slowly and deliberately, "I suppose so. Yes."

Mere Giraud caressed her hand again and again. "Yes," she said, "it must
be so. The good are always happy; and you, my Laure, have always been
dutiful and virtuous, and consequently you are rewarded. You have never
caused me a grief, and now, thank the good God you are prosperous." She
looked at her almost adoringly, and at last touched the soft thick gray
velvet of her drapery with reverence. "Do you wear such things as this
every day?" she asked.

"Yes," Laure answered, "every day."

"Ah!" sighed the happy mother. "How Monsieur Legrand must adore you!"

At length she found time to ask a few questions concerning Valentin.

"I know that he is well and as prosperous as one could expect him to
be; but I hope"--bridling a little with great seriousness--"I hope he
conducts himself in such a manner as to cause you no embarrassment,
though naturally you do not see him often."

"No," was the answer,--they did not see him often.

"Well, well," began Mere Giraud, becoming lenient in her great
happiness, "he is not a bad lad--Valentin. He means well"--

But here she stopped,--Laure checked her with a swift, impassioned
movement.

"He is what we cannot understand," she said in a hushed, strained voice.
"He is a saint. He has no thought for himself. His whole life is a
sacrifice. It is not I you should adore--it is Valentin."

"Valentin!" echoed Mere Giraud.

It quite bewildered her, the mere thought of adoring Valentin.

"My child," she said when she recovered herself, "it is your good heart
which says this."

The same night Valentin came. Laure went out into the antechamber to
meet him, and each stood and looked at the other with pale face and
anguished eyes. Valentin's eyes were hollow and sunken as if with some
great sorrow, and his large awkward frame seemed wasted. But there was
no reproach mingled with the indescribable sadness of his gaze.

"Your note came to me," he said. "Our mother "--

"She is in there," said Laure in a low, hurried, shaken voice, and she
pointed to the _salon_. "She has come to embrace me,--to make sure
that I am happy. Ah, my God!" and she covered her deathly face with her
hands.

Valentin did not approach her. He could only stand still and look on.
One thought filled his mind.

"We have no time to weep, Laure," he said gently. "We must go on as we
have begun. Give me your hand."

This was all, and then the two went in together, Laure's hand upon her
brother's arm.

It was a marvelous life Mere Giraud lived during the next few days.
Certainly she could not complain that she was not treated with deference
and affection. She wore the silk dress every day; she sat at the
wonderful table, and a liveried servant stood behind her chair; she
drove here and there in a luxurious carriage; she herself, in fact,
lived the life of an aristocrat and a great lady. Better than all the
rest, she found her Laure as gracious and dutiful as her fond heart
could have wished. She spent every hour with her; she showed her all her
grandeurs of jewelry and _toilette_; she was not ashamed of her mother,
untutored and simple as she might be.

"Only she is very pale and quiet," she remarked to Valentin once; "even
paler and more quiet than I should have expected. But then we know that
the rich and aristocratic are always somewhat reserved. It is only the
peasantry and provincials who are talkative and florid. It is natural
that Laure should have gained the manner of the great world."

But her happiness, poor soul, did not last long, and yet the blow God
sent was a kindly one.

One morning as they went out to their carriage Laure stopped to speak to
a woman who crouched upon the edge of the pavement with a child in her
arms. She bent down and touched the little one with her hand, and Mere
Giraud, looking on, thought of pictures she had seen of the Blessed
Virgin, and of lovely saints healing the sick.

"What is the matter?" asked Laure.

The woman looked down at the child and shivered.

"I do not know," she answered hoarsely. "Only we are ill, and God has
forsaken us. We have not tasted food for two days."

Laure took something from her purse and laid it silently in the child's
small, fevered hand. The woman burst into tears.

"Madame," she said, "it is a twenty-franc piece."

"Yes," said Laure gently. "When it is spent come to me again," and she
went to her carriage.

"My child," said Mere Giraud, "it is you who are a saint. The good God
did wisely in showering blessings upon you."

A few days longer she was happy, and then she awakened from her sleep
one night, and found Laure standing at her bedside looking down at her
and shuddering. She started up with an exclamation of terror.

"_Mon Dieu!_" she said. "What is it?"

She was answered in a voice she had never heard before,--Laure's, but
hoarse and shaken. Laure had fallen upon her knees, and grasped the
bedclothes, hiding her face in the folds.

"I am ill," she answered in this strange, changed tone. "I am--I am cold
and burning--I am--dying."

In an instant Mere Giraud stood upon the floor holding her already
insensible form in her arm'. She was obliged to lay her upon the floor
while she rang the bell to alarm the servants. She sent for Valentin
and a doctor. The doctor, arriving, regarded the beautiful face with
manifest surprise and alarm. It was no longer pale, but darkly flushed,
and the stamp of terrible pain was upon it.

"She has been exposed to infection," he said. "This is surely the case.
It is a malignant fever."

Then Mere Giraud thought of the poor mother and child.

"O my God!" she prayed, "do not let her die a martyr."

But the next day there was not a servant left in the house; but Valentin
was there, and there had come a Sister of Mercy. When she came, Valentin
met her, and led her into the _salon_. They remained together for half
an hour, and then came out and went to the sick-room, and there were
traces of tears upon the Sister's face. She was a patient, tender
creature, who did her work well, and she listened with untiring
gentleness to Mere Giraud's passionate plaints.

"So beautiful, so young, so beloved," cried the poor mother; "and
Monsieur absent in Normandy, though it is impossible to say where! And
if death should come before his return, who could confront him with the
truth? So beautiful, so happy, so adored!"

And Laure lay upon the bed, sometimes wildly delirious, sometimes a
dreadful statue of stone,--unhearing, unseeing, unmoving,--death without
death's rest,--life in death's bonds of iron.

But while Mere Giraud wept, Valentin had no tears. He was faithful,
untiring, but silent even at the worst.

"One would think he had no heart," said Mere Giraud; "but men are often
so,--ready to work, but cold and dumb. Ah! it is only a mother who bears
the deepest grief."

She fought passionately enough for a hope at first, but it was forced
from her grasp in the end. Death had entered the house and spoken to her
in the changed voice which had summoned her from her sleep.

"Madame," said the doctor one evening as they stood over the bed while
the sun went down, "I have done all that is possible. She will not see
the sun set again. She may not see it rise."

Mere Giraud fell upon her knees beside the bed, crossing herself and
weeping.

"She will die," she said, "a blessed martyr. She will die the death of a
saint."

That very night--only a few hours later--there came to them a
friend,--one they had not for one moment even hoped to see,--a gentle,
grave old man, in a thin, well-worn black robe,--the _Cure_ of St.
Croix.

Him Valentin met also, and when the two saw each other, there were
barriers that fell away in their first interchange of looks.

"My son," said the old man, holding out his hands, "tell me the truth."

Then Valentin fell into a chair and hid his face

"She is dying," he said, "and I cannot ask that she should live."

"What was my life"--he cried passionately, speaking again--"what was my
life to me that I should not have given it to save her,--to save her
to her beauty and honor, and her mother's love! I would have given it
cheerfully,--a thousand times,--a thousand times again and again. But it
was not to be; and, in spite of my prayers, I lost her. O my God!" with
a sob of agony, "if to-night she were in St. Croix and I could hear the
neighbors call her again as they used, 'Mere Giraud's little daughter!'"

The eyes of the _Cure_ had tears in them also.

"Yesterday I returned to St. Croix and found your mother absent," he
said. "I have had terrible fears for months, and when I found her house
closed, they caused me to set out upon my journey at once."

He did not ask any questions. He remembered too well the man of whom
Valentin had written; the son who was "past his youth, and had evidently
seen the world;" the pale aristocrat, who had exclaimed "_Mon Dieu!_" at
the sight of Laure's wondrous beauty.

"When the worst came to the worst," said Valentin, "I vowed myself to
the labor of sparing our mother. I have worked early and late to sustain
myself in the part I played. It was not from Laure the money came.
My God! Do you think I would have permitted my mother's hand to have
touched a gift of hers? She wrote the letters, but the money I had
earned honestly. Heaven will justify me for my falsehood since I have
suffered so much."

"Yes," responded the _Cure_, looking at his bent form with gentle,
pitying eyes, "Heaven will justify you, my son."

They watched by Laure until the morning, but she did not see them; she
saw nothing; to-night it was the statue of marble which lay before them.
But in the early morning, when the sky was dappled with pink and gold,
and the air was fresh and cool, and a silence, even more complete than
that of the night, seemed to reign, there came a change. The eyes they
had seen closed for so many hours were opened, and the soft voice broke
in upon the perfect stillness of the room:--

"The lilies in the garden are in bloom to-day. They were never so tall,
and white, and fair before. I will gather them--for the altar--to give
to the Virgin--at my confession. _Mea culpa--Mea_"--and all was over, and
Mere Giraud fell upon her knees again, crying, as she had cried before,
amid a passion of sobs and tears:--

"She has died, my child, the death of a blessed martyr."

It was rather strange, the villagers said, that Madame Legrand should
have been buried in the little graveyard at St. Croix instead of in some
fine tomb at _Pere la Chaise_; but--it was terribly sad!--her husband
was away, they knew not where, and it was Valentin's wish, and Mere
Giraud's heart yearned so over her beloved one. So she was laid there,
and a marble cross was placed at her head--a tall, beautiful cross--by
Monsieur Legrand, of course. Only it was singular that he never came,
though perhaps that is the way of the great--not to mourn long or
deeply even for those who have been most lovely, and whom they have most
tenderly loved.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mere Girauds Little Daughter, by
Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MERE GIRAUDS LITTLE DAUGHTER ***

***** This file should be named 23326.txt or 23326.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/2/23326/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
