The Project Gutenberg EBook of One Day At Arle, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: One Day At Arle

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Release Date: November 4, 2007 [EBook #23330]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONE DAY AT ARLE ***




Produced by David Widger






ONE DAY AT ARLE

By Frances Hodgson Burnett

Copyright, 1877


One day at Arle--a tiny scattered fishing hamlet on the northwestern
English coast--there stood at the door of one of the cottages near the
shore a woman leaning against the lintel-post and looking out: a woman
who would have been apt to attract a stranger's eye, too--a woman young
and handsome. This was what a first glance would have taken in; a second
would have been apt to teach more and leave a less pleasant impression.
She was young enough to have been girlish, but she was not girlish in
the least. Her tall, lithe, well-knit figure was braced against the
door-post with a tense sort of strength; her handsome face was just at
this time as dark and hard in expression as if she had been a woman with
years of bitter life behind her; her handsome brows were knit, her lips
were set; from head to foot she looked unyielding and stern of purpose.

And neither form nor face belied her. The earliest remembrances of the
coast people concerning Meg Lonas had not been over-pleasant ones. She
had never been a favorite among them. The truth was they had half feared
her, even as the silent, dogged, neglected child who used to wander up
and down among the rocks and on the beach, working harder for her scant
living than the oldest of them. She had never a word for them, and never
satisfied their curiosity upon the subject of the treatment she received
from the ill-conditioned old grandfather who was her only living
relative, and this last peculiarity had rendered her more unpopular than
anything else would have done. If she had answered their questions
they might have pitied her; but as she chose to meet them with stubborn
silence, they managed to show their dislike in many ways, until at last
it became a settled point among them that the girl was an outcast in
their midst. But even in those days she gave them back wrong for wrong
and scorn for scorn; and as she grew older she grew stronger of will,
less prone to forgive her many injuries and slights, and more prone to
revenge them in an obstinate, bitter fashion. But as she grew older she
grew handsomer too, and the fisher boys who had jeered at her in her
childhood were anxious enough to gain her good-will.

The women flouted her still, and she defied them openly; the men found
it wisest to be humble in their rough style, and her defiance of them
was more scornful than her defiance of their mothers and sisters. She
would revenge herself upon them, and did, until at last she met a wooer
who was tender enough, it seemed, to move her. At least so people said
at first; but suddenly the lover disappeared, and two or three months
later the whole community was electrified by her sudden marriage with a
suitor whom she had been wont to treat worse than all the rest. How she
treated him after the marriage nobody knew. She was more defiant and
silent than ever, and gossipers gained nothing by asking questions. So
at last she was left alone.

It was not the face of a tender wife waiting for a loving husband, the
face that was turned toward the sea. If she had hated the man for whom
she watched she could not have seemed more unbending. Ever since her
visitor had left her (she had had a visitor during the morning) she had
stood in the same place, even in the same position, without moving, and
when at last the figure of her husband came slouching across the sands
homeward she remained motionless still.

And surely his was not the face of a happy husband. Not a handsome
face at its dull best, it was doubly unprepossessing then, as, pale
and breathless, he passed the stern form in the doorway, his nervous,
reluctant eyes avoiding hers.

"Yo'll find yo're dinner aw ready on th' table," she said to him as he
passed in.

Everything was neat enough inside. The fireplace was clean and bright,
the table was set tidily, and the meal upon it was good enough in its
way; but when the man entered he cast an unsteady, uncomprehending
glance around, and when he had flung himself into a chair he did not
attempt to touch the food, but dropped his face upon his arm on the
table with a sound like a little groan.

She must have heard it, but she did not notice it even by a turn of her
head, but stood erect and steadfast until he spoke to her. She might
have been waiting for his words--perhaps she was.

"Tha canst come in an' say what tha has to say an' be done wi' it," he
said at last, in a sullen, worn-out fashion.

She turned round then and faced him, harder to be met in her rigid mood
than if she had been a tempest.

"Tha knows what I ha' getten to say," she answered, her tone strained
and husky with repressed fierceness. "Aye! tha knows it well enough.
I ha' not much need to tell thee owt. He comn here this morning an' he
towd me aw I want to know about thee, Seth Lonas--an' more too."

"He comn to me," put in the man.

She advanced towards the table and struck it once with her hand.

"Tha'st towd me a power o' lies," she said. "Tha's lied to me fro' first
to last to serve thy own eends, an' tha'st gained 'em--tha'st lied me
away fro' th' man as wur aw th' world to me, but th' time's comn now
when thy day's o'er an' his is comn agen. Ah! thou bitter villain! Does
ta mind how tha comn an' towd me Dan Morgan had gone to th' fair at Lake
wi' that lass o' Barnegats? That wur a lie an' that wur th' beginnin'.
Does ta mind how tha towd me as he made light o' me when th' lads an'
lasses plagued him, an' threeped 'em down as he didna mean to marry no
such like lass as me--him as wur ready to dee fur me? That wur a lie an'
that wur th' eendin', as tha knew it would be, fur I spurned him fro' me
th' very next day, an' wouldna listen when he tried to straighten' out.
But he got at th' truth at last when he wur fur fro' here, an' he browt
th' truth back to me to-day, an' theer's th' eend fur thee--husband or
no."

The man, lay with his head upon his arms until she had finished, and
then he looked up all white and shaken and blind.

"Wilt ta listen if I speak to thee?" he asked.

"Aye," she answered, "listen to more lies!"

And she slipped down into a sitting posture on the stone door-step, and
sat there, her great eyes staring out seaward, her hands lying loose
upon her knee, and trembling.

There was something more in her mood than resentment. In this simple
gesture she had broken down as she had never broken down in her life
before. There was passionate grief in her face, a wild sort of despair,
such as one might see in a suddenly-wounded, untamed creature. Hers was
not a fair nature. I am not telling the story of a gentle, true-souled
woman--I am simply relating the incidents of one bitter day whose tragic
close was the ending of a rough romance.

Her life had been a long battle against the world's scorn; she had been
either on the offensive or the defensive from childhood to womanhood,
and then she had caught one glimpse of light and warmth, clung to it
yearningly for one brief hour, and lost it.

Only to-day she had learned that she had lost it through treachery.
She had not dared to believe in her bliss, even during its fairest
existence; and so, when light-hearted, handsome Dan Morgan's rival had
worked against him with false stories and false proofs, her fierce pride
had caught at them, and her revenge had been swift and sharp. But it had
fallen back upon her own head now. This very morning handsome Dan had
come back again to Arle, and earned his revenge, too, though he had
only meant to clear himself when he told her what chance had brought
to light. He had come back--her lover, the man who had conquered and
sweetened her bitter nature as nothing else on earth had power to do--he
had come back and found her what she was--the wife of a man for whom she
had never cared, the wife of the man who had played them both false, and
robbed her of the one poor gleam of joy she had known. She had been hard
and wild enough at first, but just now, when she slipped down upon the
door-step with her back turned to the wretched man within--when it came
upon her that, traitor as he was, she herself had given him the right
to take her bright-faced lover's place, and usurp his tender power--when
the fresh sea-breeze blew upon her face and stirred her hair, and the
warm, rare sunshine touched her, even breeze and sunshine helped her
to the end, so that she broke down into a sharp sob, as any other woman
might have done, only that the repressed strength of her poor warped
nature made it a sob sharper and deeper than another woman's would have
been.

"Yo' mought ha' left me that!" she said. "Yo' mought ha' left it to me!
There wur other women as would ha' done yo', there wur no other man on
earth as would do me. Yo' knowed what my life had been, an' how it wur
hand to hand betwixt other folk an' me. Yo' knowed how much I cared fur
him an' what he wur to me. Yo' mought ha' let us be. I nivver harmed
yo'. I wouldna harm yo' so sinful cruel now."

"Wilt ta listen?" he asked, laboring as if for breath.

"Aye," she answered him, "I'll listen, fur tha conna hurt me worser. Th'
day fur that's past an' gone."

"Well," said he, "listen an I'll try to tell yo'. I know it's no use, but
I mun say a word or two. Happen yo' didna know I loved yo' aw' yore
life--happen yo' didna, but it's true. When yo' wur a little lass
gatherin' sea-weed on th' sands I watched yo' when I wur afeared to
speak--afeared lest yo'd gi' me a sharp answer, fur yo' wur ready enow
wi' 'em, wench. I've watched yo' fur hours when I wur a great lubberly
lad, an' when yo' gettin' to be a woman it wur th' same thing. I watched
yo' an' did yo' many a turn as yo' knowed nowt about. When yo' wur
searchin' fur drift to keep up th' fire after th' owd mon deed an' left
yo' alone, happen yo' nivver guessed as it wur me as heaped little piles
i' th' nooks o' th' rocks so as yo'd think 'at th' tide had left it
theer--happen yo' did n't, but it wur true. I've stayed round the old
house many a neet, feared summat mought harm yo', an' yo' know yo' niwer
gave me a good word, Meg. An' then Dan comn an' he made way wi' yo' as
he made way wi' aw th' rest--men an' women an' children. He niwer worked
an' waited as I did--he niwer thowt an' prayed as I did; everything come
easy wi' him--everything allus did come easy wi' him, an' when I seed
him so light-hearted an' careless about what I wur cravin' it run me
daft an' blind. Seemt like he couldna cling to it like I did an' I begun
to fight agen it, an' when I heerd about that lass o' Barnegats I towd
yo', an' when I seen yo' believed what I didna believe mysen, it run me
dafter yet, an' I put more to what he said, an' held back some, an'
theer it wur an' theer it stands, an' if I've earnt a curse, lass, I've
getten it, fur--fur I thowt yo'd been learnin' to care fur me a bit sin'
we wur wed, an' God knows I've tried to treat yo' fair an' kind i' my
poor way. It wurna Dan Morgan's way, I know--his wur a better way than
mine, th' sun shone on him somehow--but I've done my best an' truest
sin'."

"Yo've done yo're worst," she said. "Th' worst yo' could do wur to part
us, an' yo' did it. If yo'd been half a mon yo' wouldna ha' been content
wi' a woman yo'd trapped with sayin' 'Aye,' an' who cared less for yo'
than she did fur th' sand on th' sea-shore. What's what yo've done sin'
to what yo' did afore? Yo' conna wipe that out and yo' conna mak' me
forget. I hate yo', an' th' worse because I wur beginnin' to be content
a bit. I hate mysen. I ought to ha' knowed"--wildly--"he would ha'
knowed whether I wur true or false, poor chap--he would ha' knowed."

She rocked herself to and fro for a minute, wringing her hands in a
passion of anguish worse than any words, but a minute later she turned
on him all at once.

"All's o'er betwixt yo' an' me," she said with fierce heat; "do yo' know
that? If yo' wur half a mon yo' would."

He sat up and stared at her humbly and stupidly.

"Eh?" he said at last.

"Theer's not a mon i' Arle as isna more to me now than tha art," she
said, "Some on 'em be honest, an' I conna say that o' thee. Tha canst
get thee gone or I'll go mysen. Tha knows't me well enow to know I'll
ne'er forgie thee for what tha's done. Aye"--with the passionate
hand-wringing again--"but that wunnot undo it."

He rose and came to her, trembling like a man with the ague.

"Yo' dunnot mean that theer, Meg," he said slowly. "You dunnot mean it
word fur word. Think a bit."

"Aye, but I do," she answered him, setting her white teeth, "word fur
word."

"Think again, wench." And this time he staggered and caught hold of the
door-post. "Is theer nowt as'll go agen th' wrong? I've lived wi'thee
nigh a year, an' I've loved thee twenty--is theer nowt fur me? Aye,
lass, dunnot be too hard. Tha was allus harder than most womankind; try
an' be a bit softer like to'rds th' mon as risked his soul because he
wur a mon an' darena lose thee. Tha laid thy head on my shoulder last
neet. Aye, lass--lass, think o' that fur one minnit."

Perhaps she did think of it, for surely she faltered a little--what
woman would not have faltered at such a moment?--but the next, the
memory of the sunny, half-boyish face she had clung to with so strong
a love rushed back upon her and struck her to the heart. She remembered
the days when her life had seemed so full that she had feared her own
bliss; she remembered the gallant speeches and light-hearted wiles, and
all at once she cried out in a fierce, impassioned voice: "I'll ne'er
forgie thee," she said--"I'll ne'er forgie thee to th' last day o' my
life. What fur should I? Tha's broke my heart, thou villain--tha's broke
my heart." And the next minute she had pushed past him and rushed into
the house.

For a minute or so after she was gone the man stood leaning against the
door with a dazed look in his pale face. She meant what she said: he
had known her long enough to understand that she never forgave--never
forgot. Her unbroken will and stubborn strength had held her to enmities
all her life, and he knew she was not to be won by such things as won
other women. He knew she was harder than most women, but his dull nature
could not teach him how bitter must have been the life that rendered her
so. He had never thought of it--he did not think of it now. He was not
blaming her, and he was scarcely blaming himself. He had tried to make
her happy and had failed. There were two causes for the heavy passion of
misery that was ruling him, but neither of them was remorse.

His treachery had betrayed him, and he had lost the woman he had loved
and worked for. Soul and body were sluggish alike, but each had its dull
pang of weight and wretchedness.

"I've come to th' eend now surely," he said, and, dropping into her
seat, he hid his face.

As he sat there a choking lump rose in his throat with a sudden click,
and in a minute or so more he was wiping away hot rolling tears with the
back of his rough hand.

"I'm forsook somehow," he said--"aye, I'm forsook. I'm not th' soart o'
chap to tak' up wi' th' world. She wur all th' world I cared fur, an'
she'll ne'er forgie me, for she's a hard un--she is. Aye! but I wur
fond o' her! I wonder what she'll do--I do wonder i' my soul what she's
gettin' her mind on!"

It did not occur to him to call to her or go and see what she was doing.
He had always stood in some dull awe of her, even when she had been
kindest, and now it seemed that they were too far apart for any
possibility of approach at reconciliation. So he sat and pondered
heavily, the sea air blowing upon him fresh and sweet, the sun shining
soft and warm upon the house, and the few common flowers in the strip
of garden whose narrow shell walks and borders he had laid out for her
himself with much clumsy planning and slow labor.

Then he got up and took his rough working-jacket over his arm.

"I mun go down to th' Mary Anne," he said, "an' work a bit, or we'll
ne'er get her turned o'er afore th' tide comes in. That boat's a moit o'
trouble." And he sighed heavily.

Half-way to the gate he stopped before a cluster of ground honeysuckle,
and perhaps for the first time in his life was conscious of a sudden
curious admiration for them.

"She's powerful fond o' such loike bits o' things--posies an' such
loike," he said. "Thems some as I planted to please her on th' very day
as we were wed. I'll tak' one or two. She's main fond on 'em--fur such a
hard un."

And when he went out he held in his hand two or three slender stems hung
with the tiny pretty humble bells.

He had these very bits of simple blossoms in his hand when he went
down to where the Mary Anne lay on the beach for repairs. So his
fellow-workmen said when they told the story afterwards, remembering
even this trivial incident.

He was in a strange frame of mind, too, they noticed, silent and heavy
and absent. He did not work well, but lagged over his labor, stopping
every now and then to pass the back of his hand over his brow as if to
rouse himself.

"Yo' look as if yo' an' th' missus had had a fallin' out an' yo'n getten
th' worst o' th' bargain," one of his comrades said by way of rough
jest.

They were fond of joking with him about his love for his handsome,
taciturn wife. But he did not laugh this time as he usually did.

"Mind thy own tackle, lad," he said dully, "an I'll mind mine."

From that time he worked steadily among them until it was nearly time
for the tide to rise. The boat they were repairing had been a difficult
job to manage, as they could only work between tides, and now being
hurried they lingered longer than usual. At the last minute they found
it must be moved, and so were detained.

"Better leave her until th' tide ebbs," said one, but the rest were not
of the same mind.

"Nay," they argued, "it'll be all to do o'er agen if we do that. Theer's
plenty o' time if we look sharp enow. Heave again, lads."

Then it was that with the help of straining and tugging there came a
little lurch, and then it was that as the Mary Anne slipped over on her
side one of the workers slipped with her, slipped half underneath her
with a cry, and lay on the sand, held down by the weight that rested on
him.

With his cry there broke out half a dozen others, and the men rushed up
to him with frightened faces. . "Are yo' hurt, Seth, lad?" they cried.
"Are yo' crushed or owt?"

The poor fellow stirred a little and then looked up at them pale enough.

"Bruised a bit," he answered them, "an' sick a bit, but I dunnot think
theer's any bones broke. Look sharp, chaps, an' heave her up. She's a
moit o' weight on me."

They went to work again one and all, so relieved by his words that they
were doubly strong, but after toiling like giants for a while they were
compelled to pause for breath. In falling the boat had so buried herself
in the sand that she was harder to move than ever. It had seemed simple
enough at first, but it was not so simple, after all. With all their
efforts they had scarcely stirred her an inch, and their comrade's
position interfered with almost every plan suggested. Then they tried
again, but this time with less effect than before, through their
fatigue. When they were obliged to pause they looked at each other
questioningly, and more than one of them turned a trifle paler, and at
last the wisest of them spoke out:--

"Lads," he said, "we conna do this oursens. Run for help, Jem Coulter,
an' run wi' thy might, fur it wunnot be so long afore th' tide'll flow."

Up to this time the man on the sands had lain with closed eyes and set
teeth, but when he heard this his eyes opened and he looked up.

"Eh!" he said, in that blind, stupid fashion. "What's that theer tha's
sayin' Mester?"

"Th' tide," blundered the speaker. "I wur tellin' him to look sharp,
that's aw."

The poor fellow moved restlessly.

"Aye! aye!" he said. "Look sharp--he mun do that. I didna think o' th'
tide." And he shut his eyes again with a faint groan.

They strove while the messenger was gone; and they strove when he
returned with assistance; they strove with might and main, until not a
man among them had the strength of a child, and the boldest of them were
blanching with a fearful, furtive excitement none dared to show. A crowd
had gathered round by this time--men willing and anxious to help, women
suggesting new ideas and comforting the wounded man in rough, earnest
style; children clinging to their mothers' gowns and looking on
terror-stricken. Suddenly, in the midst of one of their mightiest
efforts, a sharp childish voice piped out from the edge of an anxious
group a brief warning that struck terror to every heart that beat among
them.

"Eh! Mesters!" it said, "th' tide's creepin' up a bit."

The men looked round with throbbing pulses, the women looked also, and
one of the younger ones broke into a low cry. "Lord, ha' mercy!" she
said; "it'll sweep around th' Bend afore long, an'--an'"--and she ended
with a terror in her voice which told its own tale without other words.

The truth forced itself upon them all then. Women began to shriek and
men to pray, but, strange to say, the man whose life was at stake lay
silent, with ashen lips, about which the muscles were tensely drawn.

His dull eyes searched every group in a dead despair that was yet a
passion, in all its stillness.

"How long will it be," he asked slowly at last--"th' tide? Twenty
minutes?"

"Happen so," was the answer. "An', lad, lad! we conna help thee. We'n
tried our best, lad"--with sobs even from the uncouth fellow who spoke
"Theer is na one on us but 'ud leave a limb behind to save thee, but
theer is na time--theer is na"--

One deep groan and he lay still again--quite still. God knows what
weight of mortal agony and desperate terror crushed him in that dead,
helpless pause.

Then his eyes opened as before.

"I've thowt o' deein'," he said with a catch of his breath. "I've thowt
o' deein', an' I've wondered how it wur an' what it felt like. I never
thowt o' deein' like this here." Another pause and then--

"Which o' yo' lads 'll tell my missus?"

"Ay! poor chap, poor chap!" wailed the women. "Who on 'em will?"

"Howd tha noise, wenches," he said hoarsely. "Yo' daze me. Theer is na
time to bring her here. I'd ha' liked to ha' said a word to her. I'd ha'
liked to ha' said one word; Jem Coulter"--raising his voice--"canst tha
say it fur me?"

"Aye," cried the man, choking as he spoke, "surely, surely." And he
knelt down.

"Tell her 'at if it wur bad enow--this here--it wur not so bad as it
mought ha' been--fur _me_. I mought ha' fun it worser. Tell her I'd like
to ha' said a word if I could--but I couldna. I'd like to ha' heard her
say one word, as happen she would ha' said if she'd been here, an' tell
her 'at if she had ha' said it th' tide mought ha' comn an' welcome--but
she didna, an' theer it stands." And the sob that burst from his
breast was like the sob of a death-stricken child. "Happen"--he said
next--"happen one o' yo' women-foak con say a bit o' a prayer--yo're not
so fur fro' safe sand but yo' can reach it--happen one o' yo' ha' a word
or two as yo' could say--such like as yo' teach yo're babbies."

Among these was one who had--thank God, thank God! and so, amid wails
and weeping, rough men and little children alike knelt with uncovered
heads and hidden eyes while this one woman faltered the prayer that was
a prayer for a dying man; and when it was ended, and all rose glancing
fearfully at the white line of creeping foam, this dying man for whom
they had prayed, lay upon his death-bed of sand the quietest of them
all--quiet with a strange calm.

"Bring me my jacket," he said, "an' lay it o'er my face. Theer's a bit
o' a posie in th' button-hole. I getten it out o' th' missus's garden
when I comn away. I'd like to howld it i' my hand if it's theer yet."

And as the long line of white came creeping onward they hurriedly did
as he told them--laid the rough garment over his face, and gave him the
humble dying flowers to hold, and 'aving done this and lingered to the
last moment, one after the other dropped away with awe-stricken souls
until the last was gone. And under the arch of sunny sky the little
shining waves ran up the beach, chasing each other over the glittering
sand, catching at shells and sea-weed, toying with them for a moment,
and then leaving them, rippling and curling and whispering, but
creeping--creeping--creeping.

They gave his message to the woman he had loved with all the desperate
strength of his dull, yet unchanging nature; and when the man who gave
it to her saw her wild, white face and hard-set lips, he blundered upon
some dim guess as to what that single word might have been, but the
sharpest of them never knew the stubborn anguish that, following and
growing day by day, crushed her fierce will and shook her heart. She
was as hard as ever, they thought; but they were none of them the men
or women to guess at the long dormant instinct of womanhood and remorse
that the tragedy of this one day of her life had awakened. She had said
she would never forgive him, and perhaps her very strength made it long
before she did; but surely some subtle chord was touched by those heavy
last words, for when, months later, her first love came back, faithful
and tender, with his old tale to tell she would not listen.

"Nay, lad," she said, "I amna a feather to blow wi' th' wind. I've had
my share o' trouble wi' men foak, an' I ha' no mind to try again. Him as
lies i' th' churchyard loved me i' his way--men foak's way is apt to be
a poor un--an' I'm wore out wi' life. Dunnot come here courtin'--tak' a
better woman."

But yet, there are those who say that the time will come when he will
not plead in vain.






End of Project Gutenberg's One Day At Arle, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONE DAY AT ARLE ***

***** This file should be named 23330.txt or 23330.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/3/23330/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
