The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Wolf, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Good Wolf

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Illustrator: Harold Sichel

Release Date: June 12, 2013 [EBook #42920]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD WOLF ***




Produced by Elaine Laizure from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.





FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT

THE

GOOD WOLF

BY

FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY,"

"THE LITTLE PRINCESS," ETC., ETC.

ILLUSTRATED BY

HAROLD SICHEL

CHICAGO: M. A. DONOHUE & Co.



Copyright, 1907, 1908, by HOLIDAY PUBLISHING CO. NEW YORK

Entered at Stationers Hall All rights reserved

Published, September, 1908

Reprinted, September, 1909

Reprinted, May, 1912

Reprinted, July, 1913

Reprinted, August, 1914



CHAPTER ONE

THERE was once a fat little, nice little, round little boy and his
name was Tim. As soon as people looked at him they began to laugh
and he began to laugh too. He had dimples on his knees and dimples
on his hands and dimples all round his mouth. That was because
Fairies liked him and used to kiss him whenever they flew past him,
and they kissed him so much that they made dimples. He had a lot of
curly hair which made a lovely mop. In fact he was lovesome all
over and no one ever denied it. But when he played about and he
never stopped playing the wind blew his curly mop into tangles, and
when he stood on his head on his bed or the grass or the nursery
floor, that rubbed it into tangles; and when he was asleep and
cuddled down into his pillows and dreamed delightful things, that
ruffled it into tangles. So after he was dressed in the morning his
mamma was obliged to brush them all out and comb out all the knots
and make him look soft and fluffy and lovesome for the rest of the
day. Now of course this might have been very horrid for both of
them. He might have wriggled and cried and she might have pulled
hard and scolded. But nothing of the sort happened because they
were both nice people. He was a nice people and she was a nice
people. So she used to sit down on a chair by a window which looked
right into a big maple tree where birds lived, and Tim used to turn
his back and stand leaning his fat little warm body against her
knee and then she would comb and brush, and while she did she told
him the Hair Curling Stories. This was one of them and it was
called:

THE GOOD WOLF.

Once there was another little boy and his name was Bartholomew
Herbert Hubert Ellecompane but of course he was not called all that
at once. When people wanted him they only said Barty and he was
quite satisfied, because you see that if every time anyone wanted
to make you a present of a beautiful train or a box of caramels, he
had to call out "Bartholomew Herbert Hubert Ellecompane" before he
could give them to you, a great deal of time would be wasted.

Well, Barty was a nice people. If he had not been you would
probably have heard crying and seen wriggling in his nursery every
morning. He lived in the time when boys wore quite long, curly hair
and if your hair is short you don't know how much combing and
brushing that takes. But Barty was so cheerful that he did not mind
it one bit and even used to laugh and chuckle and sing songs his
hair was being brushed. (When the story of the Good Wolf was being
told to Tim his mother used to feel his fat little body shake
against her knee when he heard this part because he always laughed
and chuckled at it.)

Indeed Barty was a great blessing and a privilege. He lived on the
edge of a deep forest, and he was very fond of that forest because
there were such wonderful things in it things that grew and things
that built nests and things that burrowed under the earth and made
long passages and little warm caves to live in delightful things.
Besides which Barty had heard that there were Fairies there, though
he had never seen one.

He was not a rich little boy, in fact he was quite poor. He had no
toys at all because his father and mother had no money. When he
went to bed. He used to lie and think of all the things he would
like to have, and when he went to sleep he sometimes dreamed he had
them, which was very nice, but when he wakened they were not there.

One morning in the winter he wished very much for a sled because
when he looked out of the window all the ground was covered with
sparkling snow and all the trees in the forest were loaded with it,
and the sun was shining on glittering icicles hanging from the
roof.

"I want a sled," he whispered to himself as he pressed his little
nose against the glass. "I want one I wish I had one."

If he had not been a blessing and a privilege he would have cried,
but he actually didn't. He scrambled down and asked his mother to
put on his thick scarlet cap and coat and his rubber boots, and he
went striding out into the snow like a stout little robin red
breast.

He stamped across the road and stamped across the field to the edge
of his beloved deep forest, because he wanted to see what things
were doing, the things that build nests and the things that burrow
and make little warm caves to live in.

And when he reached the very edge where the thick trees began--there
he saw sitting up on its haunches and looking straight at him
an Immense Wolf.

He gave a little jump and turned pale and was going to run away as
fast as his rubber boots would carry him, when he suddenly stopped
because he could not help it. The Wolf was speaking to him.

"Do not be frightened," he said in a slow deep voice. "And do not
run away. I am a Good Wolf."

Usually wolves don't talk, but this one did, and there were such
peculiar things about him that Barty actually forgot to be
frightened.

"How--how good are you?" he asked.

"I am this good," the Wolf said quite solemnly. "When I see a
little boy who is a blessing and a privilege and never frets and
says he has nothing to play with, and never wriggles when his hair
is brushed, I am his Best and most Intimate Friend. But--" and his
nice voice became quite fierce and growly and he showed all his
white teeth, "when I meet a boy who is a little pig and a torment
and who makes life a burden when the tangles are taken out--I tear
him from limb to limb!"

"I am glad I don't make life a burden," Barty said.

"So am I," answered the Good Wolf. "I prefer to be your Intimate
Friend. Look at my ears."

He need not have said that, because Barty had been looking at them
all the time. He had thought them very queer at first because they
were so very big and tall and pointed, and one was pink and one was
blue. But they had been growing queerer and queerer every minute
because they had been growing bigger and bigger and bigger right
before Barty's eyes.

"Watch them," said the Good Wolf.

He shook the pink ear. Once he shook it--twice he shook it--three
times he shook it. And out of it fell a beautiful red sled--exactly
the kind Barty had dreamed about.

"That is for you," the Good Wolf said. "It is a present from your
Intimate Friend."

"Oh! Oh! Oh! Thank you! Thank you! Thank you!" shouted Barty and he
danced and danced about.

"Look again," the Good Wolf said.

He shook the blue ear. Once he shook it--twice he shook it--three
times he shook it. And he shook out a splendid train with ever so
many cars, and a key to wind it up and make it go--exactly the kind
Barty had dreamed about.

Barty jumped at it and knelt down in the snow.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he kept saying because he could scarcely believe he
was awake.

Then the Good Wolf shook the pink ear and pennies flew out--pennies
and pennies and pennies--just like a shower of rain; and while
Barty was scrambling about shouting for joy and picking them up,
the blue ear was shaken and a purse flew out, so that there was a
place to put the pennies in, and Barty picked up enough to stuff it
full to the brim.

He just danced up and down.

"What a Good Wolf you are!" he said. "I did not know any wolf could
be as good as this."

"Ah!" said the Good Wolf. "You don't know me!"

(When Tim's mother came to this part of the story he used to jump
up and down and laugh for joy until his face was full of dimples.)

The Good Wolf was enjoying himself as much as Barty was. He was
smiling and smiling and wagging his tail.

"Now," he said, "do you want to go into the forest and see the
things that build nests and the things that burrow under the ground
and make little warm caves to live in?"

"Please yes!" Barty shouted. "Please yes!"

Then the Good Wolf shook the pink ear. Once he shook it--twice he
shook it--three times he shook it and there flew out a beautiful
set of harness made of red leather studded with gold ornaments and
hung with tiny sleigh bells.

That made Barty stare because he did not know what it was for.

"It is for me," the Good Wolf said. "You must harness me to your
sled and I will draw you anywhere in the world--just anywhere."

Barty clapped his hands and jumped up and down more than ever. He
had always wanted to be a coachman and once he dreamed that he had
a cart and horse.

"But before you harness me," the Good Wolf said, "there is
something else to be done. If your mother were to see a wolf
galloping off into the forest with her boy she would not know he
was a Good Wolf and she would be frightened, and if we met a hunter
in the forest he would not know I was a good wolf and he would
shoot me. So I must change myself into something else."

"Can you?" cried Barty, and his eyes grew as big as saucers, he was
so delighted.

"Just you watch me!" said the Good Wolf.

Once he shook himself--twice he shook himself--three times he shook
himself--and then something very funny happened. While he was
shaking himself he shook so fast that he looked as if he were
standing in a white mist. Then he stopped quite suddenly and stood
still. And actually instead of being a wolf he had changed into a
great big dog the kind of big dog that drags sleds over the snow
for the Esquimau people--but he was as white as the snow was.

He was so furry and handsome that Barty ran to him and hung round
his neck hugging him. He had so wanted a dog and this was exactly
the kind he had dreamed about.

"Put on my harness. Put it on!" said the Good Wolf. "I will show
you how."

He showed him how to do it all, and when he was harnessed to the
sled and stood ready with the scarlet leather straps and gold
buckles and jingling gold bells shining out against his thick furry
white coat, he looked like a picture--so did the sled--so did Barty
in his red coat and cap, dancing up and down with his whip in his
hand.

"Take the reins and jump on," said the Wolf.

And Barty did take the reins and jump on, and the Good Wolf began
to trot, and the scarlet harness shone, and the bells jingled and
jingled, and off they went gliding over the sparkling snow into the
forest--the deep, deep forest where things built nests, and things
burrowed under the earth and made long passages and little warm
caves to live in.

CHAPTER TWO

IF you never drove over the sparkling snow in a red sled drawn by a
big, furry, white dog (who is really a Good Wolf in disguise) you
don't know how delightful it was to Barty and how he laughed with
joy to hear the gold bells jingle, jingle, jingling on the harness.
When they trotted and jingled and slid into the forest the ground
was covered with a thick white carpet over which the sled went
flying. The branches of the trees were piled with white softness
and the tiny pines and cedars, which were only just big enough to
stick their heads above the deep snow, wore crowns and garlands and
icicle diamonds. And everything seemed so still so still that you
could hear a whisper a mile off.

"Where are the things that build nests and the things that burrow
under the earth?" asked Barty.

"They are keeping out of the way. They are very careful when the
snow is on the ground. You see it is so white that when they come
out to hop or run about on it, men with guns and dogs can see them
and that is very dangerous. But I am going to take you to a place
where you will see plenty of them. You are going to see a Snow
Feast. I am taking you now."

"What is a Snow Feast?" Barty asked, getting quite red with
pleasure. "It does sound esciting." (He meant to say exciting.)

"It is exciting," answered the Good Wolf. "No little boy in the
world has ever seen it."

"Has any big boy seen it?" asked Barty.

"No. Not one person in all the world has seen it. It is the
greatest secret there ever was. If I were not a Good Wolf I could
not see it. Only the very nicest people are allowed. It's the way
you behave when knots are combed out of your hair, that lets you
in."

Barty was so joyful that he wriggled on his sled and the bells on
the reins jingled and jingled.

"I think I'll trot rather faster," the Good Wolf said.

"Would you mind trotting as fast as ever you can?" said Barty.

"I'll trot very fast," the Good Wolf answered. "I'm excited
myself."

So he trotted faster and faster and faster and faster, and the sled
whizzed over the snow and wound in and about between the tree
trunks like lightning, but it never struck against anything, or
upset or even joggled. It was simply wonderful. And the forest was
wonderful. It was so much bigger than Barty had ever dreamed of its
being. They went on and on and on and on, past strange trees, and
strange dells, and strange caves, and the glittering snow was piled
everywhere, and the sky grew bluer and bluer, and the sun shone
brighter and brighter.

"It must be a Fairy Wood!" cried out Barty as they went flying
along.

At that very minute they stopped. They were in a big circle with
trees growing thick and tall all round it. The snow looked as if
there were a great many tiny hillocks under its whiteness.

"I believe this is a rabbit warren," Barty said. "That is why the
snow looks lumpy."

"You wanted to see what the things that burrow under the earth are
doing and I am going to show you," answered the Good Wolf. "Get off
the sled and take my harness off."

"But rabbits are afraid of dogs," said Barty.

"They are not afraid of me," said the Good Wolf. "If I did not go
to their Snow Feast, they would be perfectly miserable. I'm always
invited. Take my harness off." Barty took it off very politely.

"Now put it on the sled and come along," the Good Wolf ordered.

"But rabbits are afraid of boys," said Barty.

"They are not afraid of boys who are a blessing and a privilege.
Come on."

They went to the largest hillock and stood by it. There was a hole
in it, and Barty saw that it was an opening into a burrow.

"Is that the way in to the Snow Feast?" he asked. "We are too big to
get in there."

"Watch me," said the Good Wolf.

Once he shook himself, twice he shook himself, three times he shook
himself, and each time he did it he got smaller and smaller until
after the third time he was as small as a rabbit.

"But I am too big," said Barty.

"Shake yourself once, shake yourself twice, shake yourself three
times," said the Good Wolf, "and you will see what will happen."

Once Barty shook himself, twice Barty shook himself, three times
Barty shook himself, and he did see what happened. He was as small
as a rabbit, and as he stood in the snow in his red coat and cap
and his tiny rubber boots, he was too pretty for anything.

"Now for the Snow Feast," the Good Wolf said. "Just follow me."

Barty did follow him, and in a minute he found himself in a place
like a wonderful little town under the earth. There were hundreds
of long narrow passages like corridors, which crossed each other
and ran this way and that, and seemed to have no end at all. The
walls and roofs were smooth and brown, and were lighted by
thousands and thousands of glow-worms that had fastened themselves
in beautiful festoons and patterns overhead and along the sides of
the corridors. It was like the most lovely illumination.

"Every glow-worm in the forest comes to the Snow Feast," the Good
Wolf explained. "They can't dance but they like to look on. That is
their way of enjoying themselves. They polish their lamps up for
months before the Feast time."

They were so beautiful to look at that Barty could not have taken
his eyes from them if the Good Wolf had not been in such a hurry.
"We must not stop here," he said. "We mustn't really. We must get
to the Hall of the Snow Feast. Trot along--trot along--trot along."

So they trotted and trotted round corners into other passages, and
round other corners into other passages, in and out and farther and
farther in the most wonderful and amusing way. The festoons and
garlands of glow-worms lighted everything brilliantly, and
presently they began to see all sorts of interesting little animals
trotting along too as if they were all going to the same place. The
delightful thing was that no animal was bigger than a small rabbit
and there seemed to be every kind of animal Barty had ever heard of
in his life or had ever seen pictures of. There were little
elephants and little rhinoceroses, and little lions and tigers and
leopards and giraffes, and wolves and foxes and bears, and tiny
horses and sheep and cows, and they were all trotting along as if
they were as happy as possible.

"Oh!" Barty cried out. "It looks as if a Noah's Ark had come alive.
Look at that tiny elephant trotting by the lion! Why don't they
fight?"

"Nothing fights at the Snow Feast. Every one is quite tame. Lions
and lambs talk things over, and cats and robins are intimate
friends. Trot along--trot along."

Barty trotted along, but he could not help asking questions. He was
so happy and excited.

"How did they make themselves so little?" he said. "Did they shake
them selves before they came down into the burrow?"

"Yes."

Barty looked at the elephant, and remembering how monstrously big
elephants are when you see them at a circus, he could not help
laughing aloud.

"Once he shook himself, twice he shook himself, three times he
shook himself, and then he grew as little as that," he said. "Oh! I
wish I could take him home to play with."

"We will see what we can do about that," the Good Wolf said, just
as if anything nice in the world might happen if you once came to a
Snow Feast.

At the moment he said that, they turned another corner and there
they were in a very much bigger passage, which ended in an archway
toward which all the little animals were making their way. This
archway was the entrance to a great Hall which was so big that you
could not see the end of it. It was lighted by myriads and myriads
of glow-worm lamps, and beautifully decorated with sea shells and
flowers made of snow and icicle jewels, and there was music being
played somewhere, and in one part there were tables loaded with
every kind of delightful thing to feast on. It was the most
beautiful place that Barty had ever beheld, and he really could not
help jumping a little for joy when he got inside. A little lion who
had just trotted in saw him and laughed.

"I feel like that too!" he said, and he gave two or three funny
little jumps himself.

"I didn't know you could talk," said Barty.

"We can all talk at the Snow Feast," said the little lion. "That's
the fun of it."

"May I pat you?" Barty asked.

"Yes," the little lion answered. "May I pat you?"

That made Barty laugh.

"You may if you like," he said, "but I did not know animals wanted
to pat people."

"They don't," said the little lion, making a merry little skip. "I
just said that for fun." And then Barty and he laughed like
anything.

They were intimate friends from that minute, and the Good Wolf, who
had to go to speak to some one on business, left them together.
Then, I can tell you, fun began. The little lion brought another
little lion to Barty, and then he brought two fat little roly-poly
bears who were twin brothers; and then he brought a tiny elephant,
and a baby hippopotamus, and three beautiful kitten leopards, and
the most lovely little snow-white horse with a long mane and a tail
almost sweeping the ground.

Barty could scarcely believe his eyes. When the little elephant
tossed up his trunk and trumpeted for him he almost shouted.

"It seems as if you couldn't be real," he said.

"We are real," said the small elephant. "But we are only like this
once a year and no other boy has ever seen us."

And suddenly, just as he spoke, they heard a tramping and tramping
and the sound of music grew louder and louder as if it were coming
nearer, and the little elephant threw up his trunk and trumpeted
very loud as if he were saluting royalty.

"What is it? What is it?" cried Barty. "Who's coming? Who's
coming?"

He said it to the Good Wolf, who at that minute came running back
in a great hurry, pushing his way through the crowd.

"Get into line!" he said. "Get into line! They are entering the
hall--their Royal Highnesses, the Noah's Ark Rabbits!"

CHAPTER THREE

BARTY'S eyes grew round and big with excitement. A wonderful
procession was entering the hall. First came a band of tiny jet
black monkeys playing on golden trumpet's--the Drum Major walking
backward before them and twirling his staff; then came two black
and two white rabbits, and they were carrying a throne on which sat
two old, old, old, white rabbits. They were so old that their hair
had grown long enough to hang down below their feet, and their eyes
were large and strange and had an ancient, solemn look in them, as
if they had been gazing at the rabbit world for thousands of years.
Barty thought their large, strange eyes looked nice, and he said so
to the Good Wolf.

"They look kind," he whispered.

"They were the two rabbits who went into the Ark with Noah," the
Good Wolf whispered back. "And they have lived so long and grown so
wise that they have found out that the best thing in the world is
to be kind. They never find fault with any one. They know too
much."

"But I thought they died long ago," said Barty.

"Everybody thought so," answered his friend. "But they didn't. They
are the great, great, great, great, great, great grandfather and
grandmother of all the rabbits in the world."

"How int'resting," said Barty, jumping up and down a little. "How
'normously interesting!"

The procession behind them was made up of their courtiers, and they
were all either black or white rabbits--a black one and a white
one--a black one and a white one. They all wore gold collars and
gold stars on their breasts. These were the Order of the Ancient
Rabbit.

The black monkey musicians took their places on a little band
stand, and as soon as the bearers of the throne set it down at the
end of the hall, a grand blast of golden trumpets was heard, and
every one of the animals made a profound bow.

Then the gentleman Noah's Ark Rabbit waved his long-haired front
foot gracefully.

"Greeting, brothers and sisters," he said. "Welcome to the Snow
Feast. What is first to be done?"

The Good Wolf whispered to a very grand Court Rabbit who was
standing near. He carried a wand and was black all over, except for
a white place on his breast, which made him look as if he were in
evening dress, and gave him a very fashionable air. The Court
Rabbit waved his wand.

"Your Majesty, I have a new guest to present to you," he said, and
he made a sign to Barty.

"Walk forward and make a bow," the Good Wolf said. "You are going
to be introduced."

Barty did as he was told, and made a very nice bow indeed. His
Majesty, the Noah's Ark Rabbit, pointed to him with a benevolent,
puzzled look.

"What kind of little animal is that?" he inquired. "I seem to
remember seeing some like him when I was in the Ark, but I cannot
remember what they were called."

The Good Wolf answered him.

"He is a boy, your Majesty," he said. "There are a good many of
them on the top." (He meant on the top of the earth, outside rabbit
burrows.)

"Turn round, Boy," said the Noah's Ark Rabbit, "and let me look at
you." And when Barty very politely turned round and round, his
Majesty scratched himself behind his long ear and repeated,
"Boy-Boy-Boy?" as if he were trying to remember something, and at last
he turned to his wife and said, "My dear, do you remember anything
about a Boy?"

The Queen Noah's Ark Rabbit had an ivory cane which she leaned on
when she walked, and she lifted it and began to poke Barty gently
all over, as if she were trying to find out what he was made of.
She was a kind looking old thing, and suddenly she began to smile.

"Of course I remember," she said, "and so will you if you think a
moment. Who saved us from the Flood by taking us into the Ark? He
would take us. And he cried like anything when his grandfather
chose another pair. Who was it?"

His Majesty slapped his knee and rocked with laughter.

"It was a Boy!" he said. "It was a Boy as sure as I am a Noah's Ark
Rabbit.

"It was a little Boy of Shem's, and he had made pets of us," said
her Majesty. "He kept us in a hutch, and when the animals were
picked out in pairs he huddled us in his arms and ran to his
grandfather, and said, "Grandfather, you must take these--you must.
If they are left behind I shall stay with them and let the Flood
drown me! And though his grandfather had picked out a much bigger
pair, he was obliged to take us or let the Boy be drowned."

His Majesty slapped his knee again. "And that is why we are here
to-day!" he exclaimed. "How did we forget about Boys!"

"It was because the Flood frightened us so much, that as soon as we
were let out of the Ark we ran away as fast as we could, and
burrowed deep into the earth, and we never have been on top since,
so we never have seen any until this minute. Dear! Dear! Dear!"
said her Majesty. "Deary, deary me!"

Barty quite blushed with pleasure. They were such nice, old,
long-haired, aged, aged benevolent things.

"I am very glad that I am a boy," he said, "if it was a boy who
saved you."

"He is the nicest little animal I ever saw," said his Majesty
enthusiastically. "I am perfectly delighted to see him. He must be
led to the feasting table and given everything he likes to eat. He
must enjoy himself. He must stuff his pockets full of good things
to carry home. What can I give you for a Christmas present, Boy? Is
there anything in all the wide world I can do for you? Goodness
gracious, mercy me! You are the preserver of all our race. You are
a Boy!"

He was so delighted that he spoke as fast as lightning, and his
words tumbled one over the other; seeing which, the Good Wolf spoke
again.

"Your Majesty, he is not only a boy," he said, "but he is a
blessing and a privilege, which all boys are not."

"Then he ought to have a Christmas present. He ought to have a
hundred thousand million Christmas presents," said the Noah's Ark
Rabbit, looking round, and growing so excited that all his long,
white fur fluffed up and stood out all over him. "Are there any
about here--are there any about? Goodness gracious, mercy me! There
ought to be Christmas presents on every side."

Her dear old Majesty, his wife, began to look about her too, waving
her fore-paws in her inexpressible agitation. (Inexpressible
agitation means that she was so excited that she did not know what
to say.) "I don't see any! I don't see any! I don't see any!" she
exclaimed. "Oh my! Oh my! Oh my! Oh my!"

"Never since I came out of the Ark," said his Majesty, "have I
known such a dreadful situation. A Boy--a Boy like this, and no
presents! The place ought to be strewn with them--it ought to be
piled up with them--it ought to be stuffed--and crammed and bulging
with them!"

(I wish you knew how Tim used to chuckle when this part was told.)

Then the Good Wolf spoke aloud with a most agreeable smile, and
unless you have seen a Good Wolf you can never know how agreeable
his smile can be.

"I know what he would like, your Majesty," he said.

"Do you! Do you?" said the Noah's Ark Rabbit, his fur fluffing up
and standing out still more because he was so interested. "Then
speak up--speak up--speak up! Don't hang back, for goodness mercy's
sake!"

"What he would like most of all would be that your Majesty should
allow some of your subjects to be his friends and play with him,"
answered the Good Wolf.

"Would he--would he really?" said the Noah's Ark Rabbit. "Why, that
seems a trifle."

"Oh!" cried Barty, "if they only might, if they only would. I
should never want any toys again as long as I lived!" and he
clasped his hands.

"Well, I can do that for you in the shake of a rabbit's tail," said
his Majesty. "How many would you like?"

"Enough," answered Barty, rather timidly, because he was so afraid
he might be asking too much, "enough to play circus, so that I
could be the ring-master. I've so often wanted to be a ring-master,
and once I dreamed I was one."

The Noah's Ark Rabbit put his hand into a pocket under his long
white fur, and he drew out a tiny whip.

"Take that and crack it as loud as ever you can, and see what will
happen," he commanded.

Barty took it and swung it as he had seen ring-masters do, and he
made it crack beautifully. What happened was that all the little
animals, every one of them, turned their heads to look at him.

"Crack it again," said the Noah's Ark Rabbit.

When Barty cracked it again the little animals began to crowd into
a circle all round him.

"Now, my dear," said the Queen Noah's Ark Rabbit, "you just walk
out and choose the ones you would like best, and ask them if they
will come and play with you when they hear your whip crack."

"I think I must be in a dream now," said Barty, as he began to go
round the circle.

"Will you be my friend and come and play with me?" he said to the
little lion, and the little lion frisked and said: "Yes! Yes! Yes!"

And then he went to some little horses and to some more little
lions, and to four elephants and a rhinoceros and a hippopotamus,
and a little tiger and two tiny polar bears, and they all cried
out: "Yes! Yes!" until at last he had enough animals to make a most
splendid circus. There was so much shouting of "Yes! Yes! Yes!"
that he began to rub his eyes.

"Are you sure I am not dreaming?" he asked the Good Wolf.

"Take him to the feasting tables," said the Noah's Ark Rabbit, "and
fill him to the brim. He will know then that he is not dreaming."

Barty's eyes sparkled, because by this time he was very hungry, and
when the Good Wolf led him into another illuminated hall where all
the nice things to eat that are in the world seemed spread before
him on tables, you can imagine what he did. He ate just as much as
a little boy could eat after getting up early on a frosty morning
and forgetting all about his breakfast. But at last a sweet smile
spread over his rosy face, and he drew a long, long breath and
said:

"My belt is very tight by now. Thank you ever so much, Good Wolf. I
never saw anything as beautiful as the Snow Feast is, and I should
like to stay until it is quite over; but if I do not go home my
mother will be frightened. Do you think there is time for me to
play a little with my circus before I go?"

"Yes, there is," the Good Wolf answered. "I'll look after the time.
Come along. I see four little elephants and three lions looking
over here this minute, as if they wanted to talk to you."

All the games Barty played and all the things he did that day, it
would take chapters and chapters to tell about. When the Good Wolf
told him it was time to go, he was being ring-master, and he was
laughing and shouting with glee. And all the little animals were
crowding round watching the elephants stand on their heads, and the
horses read things written on black boards. The Noah's Ark Rabbits
themselves were perfectly delighted, and said they had never
enjoyed a Snow Feast as much before.

"You must come next year," they said, "and the next, and the next,
and the next, and the next--" They were even going on murmuring
"the next and the next," when Barty went away.

"Now," said the Good Wolf, "trot along--trot along--trot along."

And they did trot along, down corridors and round corners, and
through galleries, and in and out, and faster and faster, until at
last they came to the hole they had crept in through; and they
crept out through it, and found themselves once more standing in
the sparkling snow with the circle of tall trees round them.

Barty clapped his hands.

"I never had such a splendid time in my life," he said. "I never
had such beautiful things to eat. I never even dreamed of anything
as nice as the Snow Feast."

"Neither did I," answered the Good Wolf. "I have nothing like it
even in the pink ear or the blue one. Now we must shake ourselves."

So they shook themselves--once they shook themselves--twice they
shook themselves--three times and there they stood just the right
size again. And the Good Wolf slipped into his harness, and Barty
jumped on the red sled, and the bells jingled and jingled; and off
they went, gliding over the sparkling snow, home through the deep
forest where things built nests, and things burrowed under the
earth, and made long passages and little warm caves to hide in; and
where there were wonderful Snow Feasts, which only one little boy
in all the world had seen or heard of, and his name was Barty.

CHAPTER FOUR

WHEN the Good Wolf had drawn the red sled with Barty on it nearly
to the edge of the deep forest, he stopped. "Now," he said, "you
must get off and unharness me."

Then Barty suddenly thought of something. "What shall I say when my
mother asks me where I got my new sled?"

"Well," answered the Good Wolf, "I think I shall have to be a kind
of secret. Mothers are very easily frightened and I wouldn't
frighten a mother for anything. You might tell her it is a present
from an intimate friend, and if she asks what his name is you can
say it is Mr. Wolf. Have you got your whip safe?"

Barty took it out of his pocket. Now that he was his real size
again it looked very tiny.

"I would advise you to go into a quiet place in the forest when you
crack that whip," said the Good Wolf. "If any one came when you
were playing circus your little animals would suddenly grow big
again and that would be very inconvenient."

"There is a very quiet place I know of," answered Barty. "It is my
secret playing place. You have to creep through bushes to get to
it. It is round and has grass on it. It will make a beautiful
circus. But when will you come back and see me?"

"I don't know yet, but I will come some time," answered the Good
Wolf. "I am glad I happened to be at the edge of the forest this
morning. There is some pleasure in taking a boy like you, who is a
blessing and a privilege, to a Snow Feast. Now I must go."

Once he shook himself, twice he shook himself, three times he shook
himself, and he was a wolf again.

"Good-bye," he said, "until we meet again." And off he trotted.

Barty went back to his house dragging his red sled after him and
thinking about things, until his cheeks were as red as his coat.

His mother was very busy making bread, but when she saw him she was
so surprised that she stopped kneading her dough.

"Where did you get that splendid sled?" she asked.

"Some one in the forest gave it to me," answered Barty. "He said he
was my intimate friend and his name was Mr. Wolf. I think," and
Barty hesitated a little as he remembered, "I do think he was a
kind of a fairy."

His mother laughed. "I should think he was too, if he gave me such
a nice present as that," she said, and she went on with her
kneading.

Barty played with his sled all the rest of the day, and at night he
put it in a very safe corner in the woodshed. Before he went to
sleep he hid the tiny whip under his pillow.

"But I do feel, now that I can't see either of them," he whispered
to himself as he lay in the dark, "I do feel as if it must have
been a dream. Was it?" And he had to put his hand under his pillow
and touch the whip before he could go to sleep.

It was curious, but the first thing when he wakened in the morning
he found himself sitting up in bed and rubbing his eyes and saying
aloud to himself:

"Was it? Was it? Was it?"

Then he remembered the tiny whip and he darted his hand under his
pillow, but he felt nothing. He lifted the pillow and looked under
it, but he saw nothing. He jumped out of bed and shook the sheet
and shook it, but he felt nothing. The tiny whip was gone.

He just stood and stared, and then he said rather slowly:

"Well, if it was a dream it was the nicest one I ever had and I'm
glad I had it. Perhaps some night I shall have it again." And he
dressed himself quickly and ran downstairs.

And this was the first thing his mother said to him as she came in
from the wood shed:

"I've just been looking at your new sled, Barty, and it is the
nicest one I ever saw."

"Oh!" Barty almost shouted, "is it in the woodshed? Is it?" And he
flew out to look, and there it was! And it was just as red and just
as jingling and just as beautiful as ever.

"The Good Wolf wasn't a dream," he cried joyfully. "And so the
other wasn't."

But as the days went by and he wished more and more that he could
find the little whip and make sure that the tiny lions and tigers
and elephants had been real, he used to go and sit down very hard
on the red sled and say out loud ever so many times:

"It wasn't a dream--it wasn't--it wasn't--it wasn't one! and that
would make him feel quite cheerful."

One quite beautiful morning, after the snow had gone away, he was
in his bedroom and he suddenly caught sight of something bright,
shining under a wardrobe.

"I wonder what that is," he said, feeling his heart begin to beat.
He crept to the wardrobe as if he thought the bright thing would
get away if it heard him, and suddenly he dropped on his knees,
thrust his arm far under the wardrobe, quite against the wall, and
pulled out the bright thing--and it was the whip. The bright part
was the gold handle. It had rolled out from under the pillow and
had rested on the edge of the bed until it had been shaken off and
rolled under the wardrobe and stayed there. Barty gave a shout.

"There," he cried, "I said it wasn't a dream--and it wasn't one!"

He was so excited that he almost did a dangerous thing. He almost
cracked the whip right in his bedroom, but he remembered just in
time that if he did, and the little animals came and his mother
came too, they would grow big all at once at sight of her, and it
would be enough to frighten any mother to death--besides the room
being so small that it wouldn't hold even a single elephant. 87

"I'd better be careful," he said to himself, "I'm glad I thought of
that in time."

When he got outside he really couldn't wait until he got into the
deep forest, and was under the trees, flying along the path which
led to the bushes which hid his secret place. It was a very secret
place. You had to crawl through a sort of tunnel until you crawled
through a hole into a clear green place with a close hedge of
bushes round it, except where there was a high rock at the back--a
great big rock with a cave in it. Barty had never been into the
cave because it rather frightened him. He thought it looked like a
Robber's Cave, though he had never seen any robbers about, and
anyway there was only a long narrow slit in the rock for any one to
squeeze in and out of. A fat robber could never have got in. Barty
crawled through the hole in the bushes and stood up on his feet,
quite out of breath. His eyes were sparkling with joy.

"Now then," he said when he had his breath again. "Now then!" And
he stood in the middle of the green circle and cracked his whip.

It was such a little whip that it made only a little crack. And at
first nothing came.

"Shake yourself once--shake yourself twice--shake yourself three
times," he said. "Perhaps I had better crack it three times." And
three times he cracked it as loud as ever he could. After he had
done it he stood quite still and listened.

He listened and listened, and the deep forest seemed so still that
he could hear himself breathe. He listened and listened again, and
it seemed so still that he felt as if he could hear himself think.
Then he listened again, and he heard a faint, faint rustle. It
sounded far away and he did not know where it came from. But
presently he knew it was coming nearer. Yes, it was coming nearer
and nearer and it seemed to be coming from the right side and from
the left and from before and behind him, and it grew louder and
louder until it sounded like scampering and like shuffling and like
jumping and like little trotting hoofs. And in about three minutes
two little lions jumped over the bushes and two little tigers
followed them and two little leopards after them, and two little
bears came shuffling through the hole at the end of the tunnel, and
two tiny hippopotamuses and two rhinoceroses, and two lovely
elephants who marched into the middle of the ring and threw up
their trunks and trumpeted; and last of all four splendid little
horses, one snow white and one jet black and two with beautiful
brown spots on them, leaped over the hedge and made a bow to Barty,
bending their heads and scraping with their feet, and wheeled about
and began to gallop round and round the ring as fast as ever they
could, just as if they were at a real circus.

"Oh, I said it wasn't a dream!" shouted Barty. "And it isn't--it
isn't--it isn't! Hooray! Hooray! Hooray! And he jumped up and down
and laughed for joy, and stamped and stamped and stamped. Then they
all crowded round him as if they felt just as happy as he did.

"Didn't you want us before?" they said. "What a long time you were
in calling us."

"I lost my whip," answered Barty, and when they all cried out
"Oh-h-h!" he suddenly felt as if he must turn round and look
behind, and when he did it he saw that the nicest thing in the
world had happened. There sat the Good Wolf near the bushes,
smiling at him. He could not help running to him and hugging him.

"Oh, I am glad! I am glad!" he said. "This is the nicest thing of
all!"

"It is nice," answered the Good Wolf. "I was hunting in Russia and
I wasn't sure I could come. But I must attend to this whip
business."

He shook his blue ear and a narrow, rather long ivory box fell out.

"That is a whip box," he said, and he began to scratch in the earth
until he made a rather deep hole under a bush. "Now," he said,
"whenever you have done with your whip you must lock it in that box
and put it in this hole, and you will always know where to find
it."

"I will never forget," said Barty.

The circus they had that morning was ten times as nice as the one
they had had before.

"Oh, what fun it would be," said Barty, "if we had a little clown."
He wasn't hinting in the least, he only said it because it just
came into his head, and he had no sooner said it than the Good Wolf
walked forward.

"Now I should like to know," he said, "why I never thought once of
that. It was perfectly ridiculous of me."

He gave his pink ear a flip and out flew a tiny clown in baggy
white trousers with his hands stuck in the pockets, and a frill
round his neck and a red and white painted face. And he turned
sixteen somersaults one after the other and bounced onto his feet
and stuck out his tongue, and said in a cracked little shrill voice
just like a big clown: "Here we are again, sir. How are you
to-morrow?"

And this was such a tremendous joke that it was not only Barty who
laughed till he rolled over, but every single little animal laughed
till it rolled over, and the grass was just covered with little
elephants and lions and tigers and bears and the rest, rolling
about and holding their sides. There is no knowing when they would
have stopped, but in the midst of it the Good Wolf shook his blue
ear and out flew the prettiest little circus lady in the world. She
had pink tights on and wore so many short gauzy spangled skirts
that she looked like a fairy, and she whirled round and round on
the very tips of her toes, and sprang onto the backs of two of the
prettiest horses--one foot on each back--and went galloping round
the ring like lightning, smiling and kissing her hand to everybody.

That was why the circus was ten times nicer than it had been
before. Everything was there. And Barty went on being ring-master
and the circus grew more and more delightful and more and more
exciting, until at last the whole entertainment was tired and had
to sit down and rest and fan itself because it was actually hot.

They all sat in a circle, and because none of the animals were as
big as kittens, Barty looked like a very pretty giant with rosy
cheeks and curly hair. The animals had grown so fond of him that
they all sat and looked at him affectionately, and the nearest
elephant and lion perfectly cuddled up against him. The beautiful
little lady circus rider perched on his hand and the clown sat down
on his shoe.

"I am very glad to have made your acquaintance," the little lady
said. "I admire you very much. You make a most delightful
ring-master."

"We all like him," said the biggest little lion. "And we all mean
to stand by him. I came to him from the Nubian desert this morning,
and it is a long way off."

"I love every one of you," said Barty. "I don't believe there is
any other boy in the world who has such delightful friends."

He stroked the lion's side, and he was just going to put his cheek
against his mane, when he stopped suddenly and stared with wide
open eyes at the long narrow opening in the big rock at the other
side of the green circus. A thin, wicked face with evil shining
black eyes was peering out and watching him and his animals.

He started so that he almost dropped the little lion. And that
minute he saw another thin wicked face, and another above that and
another above that, all glaring at him. And the owner of the first
wicked face began to wriggle his long body through the narrow slit,
and in about two minutes he had wriggled his way out and stood
grinning, with swords and pistols and knives hung at his belt.

"He is a thin robber!" gasped Barty. "I knew a fat one could never
get in and out. It is a Robber's Cave."

CHAPTER FIVE

TO find that your secret play ground has a robber's cave in it is
very startling. Barty stood up quickly and so did all the little
animals. At first Barty thought they might suddenly grow big, as
the Good Wolf had said they would if they saw a grown-up person.
But they did not. And if they had looked as small as kittens when
they were compared with a boy, they looked almost as small as mice
when they were compared with a long, thin robber. In fact, they
looked so tiny that Barty was afraid they would be hurt.

"You had better run off into the forest as fast as you can before
he wriggles all the way out," he said quickly to the biggest little
lion.

"No, we won't," the lion answered. "Not much. We are going to stop
and see the fun."

Barty was afraid there might not be much fun, but when he saw the
lion slowly wink one eye at him and then saw another lion wink, and
a tiger and elephant wink too, until each animal in the circus had
winked, he began to see that something queer was going to happen.
But he could not imagine what it was going to be, because they all
huddled round his feet as if they were frightened, and even shook
and shivered.

When the first robber had wriggled through the slit in the rock,
another one began to wriggle through, and then another and another
until there were no less than four robbers standing scowling at
him.

"Hello!" said the biggest one, who was the captain, and had a
feather sticking in his hat and at least four pistols and six
swords hanging at his belt. "Here's a rich kid! He's just what we
were looking for. He's got the finest lot of mechanical toys I ever
saw in my life. Just look at those lions lashing their tails."

That made Barty very angry. He felt as if his friends were being
insulted, and he strode forward and stood before them.

"They are not toys!" he shouted out. "They are as real as you are!
They are my intimate friends. Go away!"

The robbers burst out laughing.

"They are not toys!" they said. "Real lions and tigers and
elephants half as big as kittens!"

"If they are real, make the lion roar," said the robber captain,
grinning.

"Oh do roar! Please roar!" said Barty to the lions. "Perhaps it
will frighten them."

The biggest little lion winked at him again quite as if he were
having a joke, and he turned round and roared. But it was such a
little roar that Barty could not help knowing that it sounded like
a toy roar. And the robbers laughed louder than ever.

"Good Wolf! Good Wolf!" he called out, and turned to look for him.
But there was no wolf there only a big, white furry dog, who looked
so innocent that he would frighten nobody.

The captain slapped his knee.

"Never since I was a robber have I seen such toys!" he cried. "We
can sell them to a king for their weight in gold. These two are
mine--and I will take the dog." And he picked up a little lion in
one hand and a little tiger in another.

"You shall not touch them!" cried out Barty. "You shall not
touch----" But he stopped in the middle of saying it because the
something very queer was beginning to happen. It began that very
minute.

The robber captain standing in the middle of the ring suddenly
turned pale. He looked so frightened that the other robbers did not
pick up anything, and stood and stared at him with their mouths
open.

"What's the matter?" he shouted out. "They are growing heavier. I
can't hold them. They are swelling! They are swelling!" and he
dropped both the lion and the tiger on the grass.

And Barty saw that they were swelling. First they swelled until
they were as big as cats, then they swelled until they were as big
as dogs, then they were as big as pigs, then they were as big as
calves, and the next second they were as big as the hugest lion and
tiger in a menagerie, and the other lions, and tigers, and leopards
were as big as they were. The elephants and rhinoceroses and
hippopotamuses had to go outside the hedge to swell because there
wasn't room inside. But they put their big heads through the bushes
so that there was no mistake about their being there.

You can just imagine how frightening it was to the robbers to find
themselves suddenly surrounded by roaring lions, and tigers, and
leopards, and huge trampling elephants and hippopotamuses instead
of tiny toy creatures they thought they could pick up and carry
away. If Barty had not known that all of them were his particular
friends he would have been frightened too. The robbers stood in the
midst of them all and howled with fright.

"Call them off! Call them off!" they shouted to Barty because they
saw he was really the ring-master, "we will never do it again!
Never--never--never--never-r-r!"

The captain tried to dart to the crack in the rock and wriggle
through, but the biggest lion put out a huge paw and dragged him
back by the seat of his trousers. He laid him flat on the grass and
put the huge paw on him and roared and roared.

"I wouldn't kill him," cried Barty. "Perhaps he is sorry."

"We are all sorry," the robbers sobbed.

"We are sorrier than we ever were before in our lives!

"I'll see that they are sorry enough," said the biggest lion, but
of course it was only Barty who understood what he said. The
robbers thought he was roaring and their knees knocked together.

"What are you going to do to them?" asked Barty.

"Watch!" answered the lion.

He made a sign to his mate and two tigers, and each of them took up
a robber by his trousers and shook him as if he were a rat. Their
legs flew and their arms flew until they looked as if they would
fly to pieces, and they had not even the strength to yell with. Of
course it must have been most disagreeable and breath-taking, but
it served them perfectly right, for if you are a robber I should
like to know what you expect.

When the shaking was over, and the lions and tigers laid the
robbers on the ground again, they did look queer. You see the bones
had nearly been shaken out of their bodies and the teeth out of
their mouths, and the hair had been shaken off their heads, every
bit of it, and they were quite bald.

"Now," said the biggest lion to Barty, "you can tell them we are
going to give them a nice bit of a run through the forest; and if
they can get away from us this time they may as well give one hour
a day in the future to remembering that if they come near this cave
any more they won't get away again. They might do their remembering
from five to six every morning."

So Barty told them, but when he had explained they were more
frightened than ever.

"We never can get away from them," the robber captain said, wiping
his eyes on his sleeve. "We are too nervous to run, and our knees
keep knocking together. Ask him if he won't let us off easier than
that. There's not one of us who would think of coming back here.
Never--never--never!"

He was in such a state that Barty actually began to feel sorry for
him. He turned and spoke to the lion.

"How would it do," he inquired, "if they stopped being robbers and
were something nicer instead--bakers or hair dressers or pew
openers?"

"We will! We will! We will!" shouted out the robbers.

"I never wanted to be a robber," sobbed the captain. "I always
wanted to be a toy-shop man. I'm fond of toys.

"And I wanted to be a confectioner," said another robber.

"And I wanted to learn to play the harp!" cried another.

"And it nearly broke my heart," said the fourth, "because I wasn't
allowed to be a gardener, and grow violets and sweet peas."

"Well," said the lion to Barty, "tell them to go away and be
anything they like that is decent."

"Wait a minute," said the Good Wolf, stepping forward. "Ask them if
they haven't had a great many adventures."

"Yes, thousands of them," the captain answered when Barty asked
him. "We've been so many things; we've been pirates and gold-diggers,
and we've sailed the Spanish Main and things like that. We
could tell stories for years if you'd like to hear them, and if
your friends would not mind if we came back here occasionally--in
our best clothes--after we've quite stopped being robbers."

"O, let them--et them!" Barty cried out joyfully.

"That was what I was thinking of," said the Good Wolf. "There is
nothing more entertaining than a tame pirate or robber."

"Tell them," said the lion, "that they may come back twice a week.
They shall be called 'The Combined Robbers and Pirates
Story-telling Club.' And we shall be here to listen and see that they
behave themselves."

So it was agreed that the robbers should be allowed to go away and
begin working as hard as possible at not being robbers. And they
were so relieved that they were going to slip off as quietly as
they could, touching their hats meekly to everybody, but Barty
could not help shaking hands with the captain just to encourage him
a little.

"I was frightened at first," he said, "but it has all turned out to
be so nice that I am very glad you came."

When they were gone he sat down and fanned himself with his hat,
and the great big lions and tigers standing round him made him look
very little indeed.

"Could you get small again, please?" he said. "I'm not a bit
frightened, but you are rather too big for my size."

Every one of them began to un-swell that moment, and they got
smaller and smaller, and smaller and smaller, until they were just
the right size again--Snow Feast size--and they sat down in a ring
around Barty; and the circus lady crept out from under a leaf and
sat on his shoulder, and the clown crawled out of the bushes and
sat down on his foot again but not before he had turned twenty
somersaults.

"Well," chuckled Barty, fanning away, "you did stand by me, didn't
you? And it has been a 'normous adventure. I shall so like to lie
awake and think of it. I know now why you all winked at me, and
said you were going to stay to see the fun."

And they all laughed like anything--the Good Wolf more than all the
rest.

In fact, they laughed and laughed and laughed until they could
scarcely stop themselves, and when at last it was time for Barty to
go home, and he said good-by to them, and the little elephants
threw up their trunks and trumpeted for him as if he were a king
going back to his palace, he ran down the path in the wood
chuckling to himself nearly all the way.

"Oh!" he said, "what wonderful things happen in the deep forest
where things sing and things build nests and burrow in the earth,
and make little warm caves to live in."

THE END








End of Project Gutenberg's The Good Wolf, by Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD WOLF ***

***** This file should be named 42920.txt or 42920.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/9/2/42920/

Produced by Elaine Laizure from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
